Synopsis 

Mr and Mrs Dursley, of — > number four, Privet Drive, were proud to say that they were perfectly normal, thank you 
very much. They were the last people you'd expect to be involved in anything strange or mysterious, because they 
just didn't hold with such nonsense. 

— > Mr Dursley was the director of a firm called Grunnings, which made drills. He was a big, beefy man with hardly 
any neck, although he did have a very large moustache. — > Mrs Dursley was thin and blond and had nearly twice the 
usual amount of neck, which came in very useful as she spent so much of her time craning over garden fences, spying 
on the neighbours. The Dursley s had a small son called — > Dudley and in their opinion there was no finer boy 
anywhere. 

Mr Dursley notices strange events on his way to work: a cat on Privet Drive happens to be reading a map, and people 
dressed in colourful robes are walking in the streets. Mr Dursley attempts to disregard these oddities. During his 
lunch break, he sees another group of curiously robed people, and hears mention of the Potters and their son, Harry. 
He is reminded of the Dursleys' shameful secret, and the reason why they pretend the Potters don't exist. When Mr 
Dursley arrives home, he hears reports of unforeseen shooting stars and flocks of owls flying during the daytime. 
Previously unwilling to discuss the Potters with Mrs Dursley, he finally verifies with her that their nephew's name is 
Harry. Mr Dursley sleeps uneasily. 

Later that night, a mysterious man by the name of — > Albus Dumbledore appears in Privet Drive. He removes from 
his robes a — > Put-Outer with which he extinguishes the street lights. Dumbledore addresses the cat which seemed to 
be reading a map earlier as — > Professor McGonagall, prompting the cat to transform into a robed woman. The 
couple talk about how recent celebrations have left "— > Muggles" inquisitive. Dumbledore confirms with 
McGonagall that — > James and — > Lily Potter are dead, and their infant son — > Harry was apparently involved in the 
defeat of their assailant, an entity named "You-Know-Who" or — > Voldemort. Harry, according to Dumbledore, is 
due to arrive at Privet Drive soon by means of someone named — > Hagrid. 

Hagrid arrives transporting himself and Harry on a flying motorbike. Dumbledore leaves the baby on the doorstep of 
number four with a letter. McGonagall despairs at the fact that Harry, a definite celebrity, will spend his childhood 
with such people. Hagrid re-mounts his motorcycle, McGonagall once again becomes a cat, and Dumbledore 
re-illuminates the streetlights, and they all depart. 

Analysis 

This is one of five chapters in the series that is not written from Harry's point of view. The other chapters are — > 
Chapter 1 of — > Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, — > Chapter 1 and — > Chapter 2 of — > Harry Potter and the Half 
Blood Prince, and — > Chapter 1 of — > Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. 

Evidence in the series indicates that Harry is born on 31 July, 1980, and orphaned on — > 31 October, 1981 — 
Hallowe'en night — when he is one year and three months old. Critics point out a lack of "trick-or-treating" and 
similar festivities on Privet Drive that night, but it should be mentioned that we don't actually see Privet Drive on the 
31st; it is the 1st of November when Vernon Dursley drives off to work, and the night of the 1st when Dumbledore 
and Hagrid arrive. 

Evidence also suggests that there is a day between the death of Harry's parents, and his arrival at Privet Drive; Harry 
is orphaned on 31 October, 1981, and the story opens with Vernon Dursley leaving for work on the morning of 1 
November. This has sparked speculation amongst readers; is there an accident of dates, or is the "missing day" a 
purposeful addition by the author? It was believed by many readers that the occurrences during that day would be 
important, possibly even pivotal, to events in the seventh book. 



Chapter 1: The Boy Who Lived 

There is also a contradiction: 1 November, 1981 was, in reality, a Sunday, and the book states that that day is a 
Tuesday. Much of the series has minor internal conflicts of this sort. These errors or oversights do not detract from 
the sweep of the story, so while they may be mentioned, they are provided more as a curiosity than as something for 
the readers to concern themselves with. 

Questions 
Review 

1. What caused the Dursleys' embarrassment of the Potters? Why is it a secret to the Dursleys that they are related? 

2. What exactly is the cat on Privet Drive? 

3. Who are the robed people Mr Dursley sees in the streets? 

4. Who is "You-Know-Who"? 

Further Study 

1 . While many people seem to be celebrating the defeat of this Voldemort, Dumbledore seems to think the 
celebrations premature. What would make him think this? 

Greater Picture 

This chapter provides the framework for the contrast that will be echoed throughout the series between the magical 
and the mundane. 

The events that immediately result in Harry's being orphaned are not discussed in this chapter, but are gradually 
revealed throughout the series. They are included here by way of reference. 

Harry Potter is orphaned when the Dark — > Lord Voldemort murders his wizarding parents, — > Lily and — > James 
Potter. Voldemort breaks into the Potters' house in the village of — > Godric's Hollow and duels with James. 
Voldemort kills James and attempts to do the same to Lily and Harry. He is successful in killing Lily, ignoring her 
pleas to spare their lives, but his attempt to kill Harry backfires and Voldemort is apparently killed instead. When 
Harry is older and, during his first year at Hogwarts, — > meets with Voldemort, Voldemort states that Harry's mother 
need not have died. Lily's sacrificial attempt to save Harry, however, causes the — > curse, which Voldemort 
consequently attempts on Harry, to backfire. This forms a connection between attacker and victim, during which, 
parts of Voldemort's powers are transferred to the infant, and give Harry a lightning-bolt shaped scar on his forehead. 
The protection that Lily gives her son — which — > Albus Dumbledore later explains as her "love" for Harry — 
destroys Voldemort's physical body and would have killed him completely had it not been for the Dark magic he had 
been using to split his soul, called — > Horcruxes. The downfall of Voldemort renders Harry an extremely popular 
figure in the wizarding world. 

It is entirely possible that, because of the — > Fidelius charm that was meant to protect the Potters from Voldemort 
still being active, Hagrid would have been unable to find the place until one of the parties to the secret was there. We 
can safely assume that Sirius, as one of James' closest friends, would have been aware of the Potters' location; in 
fact, he does say, in — > Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, that he had seen "the bodies and the destruction" 
of the house, so he must have known the secret, either before the Fidelius charm was performed, or by — > Peter 
Pettigrew (who we will not meet until — > the third book) informing him of it afterwards. It has been conjectured that 
Hagrid was unable to enter the remains of the house to recover Harry until Sirius appeared on the scene, and it could 
have been Sirius who actually removed Harry from the wreckage and passed him to Hagrid to carry back to Little 
Whinging. Hagrid does say, however, in — > Chapter 4, that he took Harry from the wreckage himself, so we have to 
assume either that Hagrid was in on the secret, or else that the Fidelius charm ends automatically when the secret it is 
designed to protect (in this case, the whereabouts of James and Lily) is no longer operative. We could speculate as to 



Chapter 1: The Boy Who Lived 

which it is, but given that the house is apparently visible to all wizards by the time of — > the seventh book, it is most 
likely that the charm had simply ended with Lily's death. 

The fact that Sirius had seen "the wreckage" was also thought to be significant; the Killing Curse does not affect 
things, only people, and so does not leave wreckage. So the house would have been intact when Voldemort died, 
giving us a standing house, three dead bodies, and Harry. Add to this the fact that in — > Harry Potter and the Goblet 
of Fire, Voldemort had his wand back, and we are drawn inescapably to the conclusion that someone, most likely 
Peter Pettigrew, was there with Voldemort, was aware of his downfall, recovered his wand (and perhaps concealed 
his body), and destroyed the house, either in revenge or in frustration, while leaving Harry untouched, likely out of 
fear that whatever had felled Voldemort would kill anyone who tried to attack Harry. We have found out since that 
the destruction in the house was restricted to the room in which Lily was killed and Harry was sleeping; it is possible 
that Pettigrew blasted his way out of the house carrying Voldemort's body rather than trying to carry it back down 
the stairs. The fact that Voldemort, in his memory of that night as viewed in — > the seventh book, does not recall 
Peter accompanying him is inconclusive; Voldemort does not seem to pay much attention to his Death Eaters, unless 
they are directly in his way. 



Chapter 2: The Vanishing Glass 



Synopsis 

Ten years have passed since baby — > Harry was left with — > the Dursleys. The living room is full of pictures of — > 
Dudley, but none of Harry. 

Harry, who sleeps in a spidery cupboard, is awakened by his — > aunt Petunia, who is telling him to cook breakfast. It 
is Dudley's birthday and the kitchen table is covered with presents. We are told that Dudley enjoys punching Harry 
but doesn't usually catch him. Harry is described in detail. Dudley comes into the kitchen and almost throws a 
tantrum because he has fewer presents than the year before. 

The Dursleys find out that — > Mrs. Figg, the cat-obsessed lady nearby who usually watches Harry while the Dursleys 
take Dudley on his birthday trip, has broken her leg. They discuss what to do with Harry, and Dudley wails that he 
doesn't want him to come. Dudley's friend, Piers Polkiss, arrives and because they don't know what else to do with 
him, Harry gets to come along to the zoo. — > Uncle Vernon warns Harry that if anything strange happens, Harry will 
be in major trouble. (Strange things seem to happen around Harry, and the Dursleys don't believe him when he says 
he didn't cause them.) 

On the way to the zoo, Uncle Vernon becomes angry when Harry mentions he dreamed about a flying motorcycle. 

The zoo goes well at first, and Harry even gets some ice cream. When they get to the reptile house, Harry has a 
conversation with a large boa constrictor. When Dudley pushes Harry out of the way so he can see the snake's 
strange behavior, the glass enclosing the snake vanishes. The snake slides out, saying that it will go to his natural 
environment in Brazil and thanking Harry. 

In the car, Dudley and Piers greatly exaggerate their encounter with the snake, and when they are home and Piers is 
gone, Harry is sent to his cupboard by a furious Uncle Vernon. 

Later, Harry is lying in his cupboard, thinking. The only thing he remembers about his past is a flash of green light 
and a pain in his forehead. He also remembers how sometimes, when he's out with the Dursleys, strange-looking 
people seem to recognize him. 



Chapter 2: The Vanishing Glass 

Analysis 

This is the first chapter in which we see how the Dursleys are treating Harry. They treat him as if he was a slave, and 
they show him no respect at all. Importantly, however, Harry has been made neither timid nor bitter by this 
treatment, an early sign of the admirable qualities which are so vital to his destiny. 

This is also the chapter in which we see Harry's magical talents being shown, such as being able to talk to snakes 
(this will be explained more fully in this book's successor, — > Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets). Rowling 
has said that this uncontrolled magical ability is normal for wizarding children who haven't yet learned to control 
their magical powers. Strangely, Harry does not seem frightened by these bizarre incidents, and only casually 
questions them. This suggests an innate acceptance of magic, and perhaps an unconscious awareness of his true 
magical nature. 

Questions 
Review 

1. Why did Dudley pretend to cry? 

2. Why did Dudley stop his fake crying when his friend came? 

3. What kinds of strange things happen around Harry? 

Further Study 

1 . What do these strange things that happen around Harry teach us about his character? 

Greater Picture 

The scene with the snake could be construed as a hint of what is to come in the next two chapters. Harry and the 
snake are in almost the same position, as both are prisoners and are cut off from the world in which they belong: 
Harry, stuck with the Dursleys, is being prevented from joining the Wizarding world, just as the snake, captive in the 
zoo, cannot enter the world of the Amazon jungle. Also, both were raised away from their home, and so have no 
knowledge of their native worlds. And finally, each in turn is released from their prison, and head for an unknown 
future, somehow believing that it must be better then what they are leaving behind. 

In this chapter we learn of Harry's — > ability to speak to snakes, a fact that will be extremely important in future 
books. While it seems that these early signs of magic could be the trigger which sent the active phase of Albus 
Dumbledore's great plan into action, we must recall that Harry is about to turn 11, and it is in the September after 
they reach the age of 11 that magical children are invited to attend school. The author has stated that Hogwarts is the 
only Wizarding school in the UK, thus every magical child will receive the opportunity to attend when he or she 
reaches 1 1 . Not all children do attend; some, like — > Marvolo Gaunt, who we will meet later, likely would not trust 
the established school system with their children. 

Under the pretext of telling us why the Dursleys are afraid to leave Harry home alone, we learn how Harry used his 
powers before he knew he was a Wizard, basically in self-defense. This story is contrasted in — > Harry Potter and 
the Half-Blood Prince with the story of how the boy — > Tom Riddle (later known as — > Lord Voldemort) used his 
powers to terrorize others before he knew he was a wizard. This comparison adds another layer to the good vs. evil 
theme. 



Chapter 3: The Letters From No One 10 

Chapter 3: The Letters From No One 

Synopsis 

— > Harry is finally let out of the cupboard after being punished for the boa constrictor episode. The summer holidays 
have started and — > Dudley and his friends harass Harry daily, enjoying their favorite sport, "Harry Hunting". Dudley 
finds he has been accepted to — > Uncle Vernon's old public school (US: private school), Smeltings, whereas Harry 
will be going to a local comprehensive (US:public school), Stonewall High. 

In July, — > Petunia takes Dudley shopping for his school clothes. The next morning Harry finds her dyeing some of 
Dudley's old clothes grey, to make him a "school uniform". As everyone sits down for breakfast the mail arrives. 
Harry has a short fight with Dudley over who has to retrieve the mail. Harry loses. Picking up the mail, Harry sees 
there is a letter addressed to him: 

Mr. H. Potter 

The Cupboard under the Stairs 

4 Privet Drive 

Little Whinging 

Surrey 

Harry had never received mail before and wasn't sure who this could be from. The envelope was a thick, heavy, 
yellow parchment with a strange wax seal on the back. Back in the kitchen, Uncle Vernon snatches the letter from 
Harry as he tries to read it. Uncle Vernon is shocked at the contents of the letter and immediately sends Dudley and 
Harry out of the kitchen so he and Petunia can discuss it. Dudley and Harry listen to the conversation through the 
keyhole and the gap under the door, and overhear them decide to ignore the letter and not respond. 

Uncle Vernon moves Harry up into Dudley's second room. Day after day more letters show up for Harry, but they 
are now addressed to him in "The Smallest Bedroom", despite Vernon's attempts to prevent their entering the house. 
Vernon does manage to prevent Harry from getting any of the letters. On Sunday, when Uncle Vernon is sure no 
post is coming, the letters come streaming out of the fireplace. Vernon decides enough is enough, packs everyone 
into the car and drives all day to a run-down hotel on the outskirts of some city. The next day "about a hundred 
letters" show up at the hotel for Harry. Next, Uncle Vernon finds a rickety old shack out on a rocky island off the 
coast, accessible only by boat. As they settle in for the night Harry stares at Dudley's watch, counting down the 
minutes to midnight and his eleventh birthday. A storm is raging outside but Harry thinks he hears something else 
outside the shack. Just as he counts the final second down to his birthday a huge BOOM shakes the shack. Someone 
is knocking on the door. 

Analysis 

Uncle Vernon's attempts to shut out, and then run away from, the letters can be seen as an analogy with people's 
tendency to try to ignore facts. The tendency to try to avoid unpleasant truth is a common human weakness. The idea 
that if you refuse to admit something to yourself, then it can't be true, may be very comforting sometimes. The 
problem is that, just like the letters that burst out of the fireplace, the truth has a tendency to come back and strike 
you in the face. Unfortunately, this is a lesson that Vernon Dursley never seems to learn, as determined denial and 
brutish ignorance are the key qualities of his character. This chapter has an enjoyably tense atmosphere, as it almost 
as if Harry's true identity and destiny is rushing toward him, and no matter how hard the Dursleys try to outrun it, 
with a "BOOM!" on the door it catches up, and nothing will ever be the same again. 

As mentioned in — > Chapter 1, there are a few places in the stories where days and dates don't line up. We have 
already seen that this book covers events largely in 1991 and 1992. The Dursleys leave Privet Drive for the hotel on 



Chapter 3: The Letters From No One 1 1 

Sunday, leave the hotel and drive to the island on Monday (Dudley complains because he is missing The Great 
Umberto on TV), and so Harry's birthday falls on Tuesday. However, July 31, 1991 is a Wednesday. This trivial 
error does not truly affect the story in any way, and is included here more as a curiosity than as something for the 
scholar to concern himself with. 

Questions 
Review 

1 . Why does Uncle Dursley decide to move Harry out of the cupboard? What does Dudley think of this change? 

Further Study 

1 . How could the writer of the letters know where Harry's room/place was at any given moment? 

2. Who is the person that is sending these letters? 

3. Who is the person that comes to get Harry? 

4. Does Harry get to read his letter? And when? 

Greater Picture 

This chapter shows the great lengths that the Dursleys are willing to go to in order to appear normal to neighbors and 
not to draw attention to themselves. Their need to appear normal in front of others is the reason they hide Harry in 
his room and is also the reason they keep him at their home after the dramatic events at the — > beginning of Harry's 
fifth year. 

Chapter 4: The Keeper of the Keys 

Synopsis 

BOOM! The knockings continue outside the door. — > Vernon comes running in with a rifle as the door is smashed in. 
A huge man with a bearded face enters. He twists Uncle Vernon's gun like a pretzel, sits down and wishes — > Harry 
happy birthday, and gives him a squished cake. The giant man makes himself at home, starts a fire and makes tea 
and sausages. He introduces himself as — > Rubeus Hagrid, Keeper of Keys and Grounds at Hogwarts. Hagrid is 
dismayed to find the Dursleys have told Harry nothing of his past or of his parents, and furious that they told Harry 
that his parents died in a car crash. Hagrid explains that Harry is a wizard, a very famous wizard. He gives Harry his 
letter, now addressed to him at the shack. The letter explains that Harry has been accepted to — > Hogwarts School of 
Witchcraft and Wizardry. 

Hagrid sends an owl to — > Professor Dumbledore saying he found Harry and will be taking him to get his school 
supplies. — > Petunia begins ranting and Harry learns that she and Uncle Vernon have lied to him about his past. 
Hagrid tells Harry about a very dark wizard, by the name of — > Voldemort (though Hagrid seems to have enormous 
difficulty saying the name, apparently out of fear), who ten years ago (when Harry was only one year old) tracked 
down and killed Harry's parents, — > James and — > Lily Potter. He tried to kill Harry too, but failed, and that is how 
Harry got the scar on his forehead. Harry asks Hagrid what happened to Voldemort and Hagrid tells him that no one 
is sure, but something happened to him (on the Hallowe'en night he tried to kill Harry) that drove him into hiding. 

Harry questions whether he is really a wizard, but Hagrid asks whether he had ever made things happen when he was 
angry or scared. Harry remembers things he had done, most recently the boa constrictor, and smiles. Uncle Vernon 
cuts in and says Harry isn't going to a magic school. He then insults Albus Dumbledore, calling him a crackpot. This 
sends Hagrid into a fit of rage and he causes a pig's tail to grow out of — > Dudley's back side. The Dursleys scramble 



Chapter 4: The Keeper of the Keys 12 

into the other room, terribly afraid of Hagrid. Hagrid asks Harry not to mention the magic he performed to anyone at 
Hogwarts, as he isn't supposed to do magic anymore. Harry asks why not, and Hagrid explains that he had been 
expelled from Hogwarts during his third year. Harry questions him further, but Hagrid changes the subject saying it's 
late and they have lots of things to do the next day. At that they go to sleep, Hagrid on the couch, Harry under 
Hagrid's huge coat on the floor. 

Analysis 

In this chapter, we learn a bit more of what happened the night Lord Voldemort came to Godric's Hollow. We also 
get a feeling for the dread that most wizards have for Voldemort, or even his name. 

The Dursley's behaviour here is a classic example of the human tendency for ignorance and fear to go hand in hand. 
In a vicious circle, their ignorance about magic makes them afraid of it, and their fear prevents them from developing 
a better understanding. In contrast, Harry's willingness to accept his magical nature when the evidence is shown to 
him, clearly indicates his open-minded intelligence. 

One of the central themes to these books is the danger of prejudice and divisiveness, and this chapter, particularly 
Petunia's tirade, gives a picture of the prejudiced view from the Muggle side of the Muggle/Magic divide. 

Questions 
Review 

1 . What does this chapter tell us about Aunt Petunia's character? 

2. Why do Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon hide Harry's secret? 

3. Do they tell him what his secret is? Why or why not? 

Further Study 

1 . Can you think of a reason, aside from ignorance and fear, for Petunia's apparent hatred of her sister Lily? 

Greater Picture 

This chapter briefly mentions Hagrid's expulsion from Hogwarts, which will be important to the plot of the next 
book, — > Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets. 

Hagrid's fear of saying Voldemort's name will be echoed through almost all of the series, with people referring to 
Voldemort as "you-know-who" and variants on that theme. This dread, though constant, will be greatly reinforced in 
— > the seventh book, where we will learn that Voldemort has, in fact, placed a taboo on his name, such that anyone 
who speaks it will be immediately detected and subject to reprisals. We will find that the taboo is specifically aimed 
at those who would fight him, as they are the only ones who dare speak his name. While this is never mentioned, it is 
entirely likely that a similar taboo was in place in Voldemort's initial time in power, and it would be this taboo which 
had engendered a fear of speaking the name among the Wizarding populace. 

In this chapter, by learning his true nature, Harry has taken the first step on the path of his eventual destiny. He will 
continue on this path throughout the entire series, with occasional setbacks. 



Chapter 5: Diagon Alley 13 



Chapter 5: Diagon Alley 



Synopsis 

— > Harry wakes up to find an owl attacking — > Hagrid's coat. Hagrid tells him to give the owl five Knuts, which turn 
out to be odd-looking coins, and they set off for London. Walking down the street, Harry notices — > Muggles 
(non-magical folk) are looking at them strangely and are scrambling to let Hagrid pass. 

After climbing broken down escalators to the London Underground and getting Hagrid stuck at the ticket barrier 
(and after complaints from Hagrid that the seats were too small and trains too slow), they finally reach Central 
London. 

Soon, they reach a place called the Leaky Cauldron. Harry notices the Muggles' gaze traveling from the record shop 
on one side to the bookstore on the other side, not noticing the pub in-between. He has a feeling that of those present, 
only Hagrid and himself can see it. 

On entering the pub, Harry is greeted enthusiastically by many excited people, including one — > Quirrell, who 
Hagrid says will be teaching Harry about — > Defence Against the Dark Arts. Leaving the Leaky Cauldron, Harry and 
Hagrid find themselves in a small courtyard behind the pub. While Harry thinks over the responses of the people, 
Hagrid starts counting the bricks on top of the bin with his umbrella. He then taps a brick three times and a hole 
appears, getting bigger and bigger, and turns into an archway. They enter — > Diagon Alley. 

Harry and Hagrid walk past the wizard shops to the end of the street, where — > Gringotts, the wizard bank, stands. At 
Gringotts, Hagrid provides the key to Harry's parents' vault, and a note authorizing him to enter another vault on 
behalf of — > Dumbledore. After a high-speed cart ride with — > Griphook the goblin (which makes Hagrid queasy), 
they reach Harry's vault, which is full of — > wizard money (galleons, sickles and knuts). Hagrid helps Harry draw 
enough for school supplies and a year at school, and educates him on the wizard monetary system. After another cart 
ride, Hagrid removes the only contents of vault seven hundred thirteen, a small grubby parcel, without explaining 
what it is. 

Back on the surface, Harry, with Hagrid's assistance, buys school supplies. He meets another first-year Hogwarts 
student who seems quite full of himself; but before introductions can be completed, Harry's robes are finished and he 
moves on to buy other supplies: books, a cauldron, a telescope, and potion supplies. For his birthday, Hagrid buys 
him an owl, — > Hedwig. Finally, at — > Ollivander's, Harry buys a wand, which turns out, according to Mr. 
Ollivander, to be twin to the one sold to — > Voldemort, each being made with one of the only two tail-feathers ever 
given by one particular — > phoenix. 

Analysis 

Harry is amazed that he is so respected by these people. Without realizing it, he is famous, a hero to an entire people. 
In this chapter, we see Harry's reaction to fame; mostly, he is a bit embarrassed, because he feels he has done nothing 
to deserve the adulation that is being cast his way. We will be contrasting this with the behaviour of someone who 
lives for fame in the next book, — > Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets. 

We are also here, for the first time, exposed to the parallel Wizarding economy, and to the magical creatures that 
exist in the Wizarding world. We meet goblins, and hear about phoenixes, dragons, unicorns, hags, and vampires; 
this is our first intimation that these creatures out of mythology may have a real, parallel existence. 

Harry finds that having a wand related to Voldemort's makes him uneasy; while Ollivander sees it as an indication 
that Harry will be a great wizard, Harry finds it disturbing that he could have even that small a similarity to a wizard 
who is universally seen as evil, further evidence of his admirable character. The provenance of the magical core of 
Harry's wand will become important in — > Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire and in — > Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows. 



Chapter 5: Diagon Alley 14 

Questions 
Review 

1 . Hagrid says that the Wizarding monetary system is simple. Is it? 

Further Study 

1 . We see that Harry and Hagrid get off the island by using the same boat that Harry and the Dursleys used to get 
there. If Harry and Hagrid take the only boat on the whole island, how did the Dursleys get home? 

2. When asked how he had gotten to the island, Hagrid reported that he had flown there. Apparently, wizards cannot 
fly without equipment such as a broom, a flying car or motorcycle, or a flying carpet. How could Hagrid fly 
there? 

Greater Picture 

The "small, grubby parcel" that Hagrid removes from the vault will turn out to be the titular — > Philosopher's Stone 
(US: Sorcerer's Stone), which will be the effective center of this book's plot. Harry, with his limited classical 
education, does not understand why this stone should be so prized, but its function will be explained to him by a 
classmate, — > Hermione Granger. 

Mention is made of Harry's humility, above. While this character trait will serve him well, it will for a long time be 
masked by his unique position as "the Boy Who Lived". Harry will defeat Voldemort repeatedly, and in the process 
will begin to believe that he is the only one who can perform certain activities. Close examination will reveal that 
while he accepts, to some extent, the description of himself as a hero, he does not use this as a way of increasing 
status; rather, he sees it as increasing his obligations. Late in the series, he becomes known as The Chosen One, as 
the Ministry tries to use him as a means of showing that they are doing something; despite being thrust into the 
limelight in this manner, Harry does not use his fame as a way of improving his lot, instead shunning it so that he can 
continue the mission he has been given. 

It is mentioned in the description of Ollivander's that the window display consists of a single wand on a cushion. We 
will find out in later books, notably — > Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, that Voldemort has been hunting 
artifacts of the Founders in order to make them into — > Horcruxes. It was suggested that the wand in Ollivander's 
window is — > Rowena Ravenclaw's; this might have had something to do with Ollivander's disappearance in Harry 
Potter and the Half-Blood Prince as well. It turns out, however, that the artifact of Ravenclaw's that Voldemort was 
after had been found by him many years before; he had located her lost diadem, and had turned it into a Horcrux 
before he met Harry. 

The idea that "The wand chooses the wizard" will also become a key point in the larger story. It will become 
particularly important in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. 



Chapter 6: The Journey from Platform Nine and Three-Quarters 15 

Chapter 6: The Journey from Platform Nine and 
Three-Quarters 

Synopsis 

Back — > at the Dursleys', — > Harry now has to wait out the month before he can go to — > Hogwarts. — > Uncle Vernon 
agrees to take him to London only because he has to take — > Dudley to a surgeon to get his pig's tail removed. The 
Dursleys then leave him standing in the station, unable to find — > Platform 9-3/4 where his train is supposed to leave. 

Harry then spots another apparent wizarding family, and tags along with them to get to the Hogwarts Express. This 
family, who recognize him for who he is, turn out to be — > the Weasleys, and Harry is introduced to three of the four 
Weasley children who are currently attending Hogwarts: — > Fred, George, and — > Ron, who ends up sharing a 
compartment with him. (— > Percy Weasley is also attending, but he is a — > Prefect and so rides in the special Prefects 
compartment at the head of the train.) Ron tells him about the treat, Chocolate Frogs, and the enclosed Famous 
Wizard cards; Harry gets — > Albus Dumbledore's card, among others. Ron also happens to mention that there had 
been a break-in at Gringotts Wizarding Bank in — > Diagon Alley; Harry is interested in this because of his own 
recent trip there. 

During the trip to school, various other students introduce themselves to him. — > Neville stops by looking for his 
toad, — > Trevor; — > Hermione Granger stops by shortly afterwards trying to help Neville find Trevor. — > Draco 
Malfoy, flanked by — > Crabbe and — > Goyle, tries to coerce Harry into an alliance, and when that fails, in part 
because of Malfoy's bad-mouthing the Weasley family, the three try to steal some of Harry's snacks; in this, they are 
stopped by — > Scabbers, Ron's pet rat, who attacks Goyle. Finally, Hermione returns, to let them know that they are 
about to arrive and should get into uniform. 

At Hogsmeade Station, — > Hagrid reappears to shepherd the first-years down to a fleet of small boats that carry the 
students across the lake to — > Hogwarts castle. 

Analysis 

Hermione, here in her first appearance of the series, is portrayed as a true grind — a girl whose "know-it-all" attitude 
is immediately off-putting. Both Harry and Ron dislike her at once... though not in the same way that they dislike the 
anti-trio, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, who they immediately despise. It is interesting how Hermione mellows during 
the course of the series; this ongoing maturation of the characters, especially Hermione and, to a slightly lesser 
extent, Harry, is a significant part of what makes the overall story so compelling. 

Draco's attitude to Ron gives us our first glimpse of the lineage-related prejudice which plagues the wizard world, 
and is the obsession of Voldemort and most of his followers. 

Albus Dumbledore's "Famous Wizards" card is the key that provides a major clue to the riddle that needs to be 
solved in the course of this book. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

While much of what Harry reads on Dumbledore's Chocolate Frog card will prove important to the story of this 
book, it will turn out that it will be somewhat important up until the very end of the series. In part of what will be an 
almost stunning amount of interconnection between the first of the series and the last, we will find that — > 
Grindelwald, mentioned on Dumbledore's Chocolate Frog card, was in fact an influence on the young Dumbledore, 
and has a large, though not central, role in the final book of the series. 



Chapter 7: The Sorting Hat 16 



Chapter 7: The Sorting Hat 



Synopsis 

Upon reaching the school, — > Hagrid hands the new students over to a teacher, — > Professor McGonagall. She leads 
the students to an anteroom, where they wait to be sorted into Houses. They are understandably nervous about this 
process, and are further unnerved by a small crowd of ghosts who pass through the anteroom on their way to the 
Great Hall. Shortly, Professor McGonagall returns, leads them into the Great Hall, and places them, one by one, 
under the — > Sorting Hat, which calls out the house to which they are assigned. There are four houses in Hogwarts, 
each with very specific characteristics. — > Slytherin is filled with ambitious, cunning witches and wizards. — > 
Ravenclaw is home to the most intelligent witches and wizards. — > Gryffindor houses only the brave, and — > 
Hufflepuff is where the most fair and honest go. The Sorting Hat suggests quietly that Harry might fit well in 
Slytherin, but when Harry balks at this, it places him instead in Gryffindor House. 

— > Ron and — > Hermione also are Sorted into Gryffindor, along with several others. — > Professor Dumbledore then 
makes a few eccentric prefatory remarks, and the feast begins. In the course of the feast, we are introduced to — > Sir 
Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington, the Gryffindor house ghost, who is nicknamed Nearly Headless Nick; and to some 
of the other students in Harry's year: — > Neville, who had almost lost his toad on the train; — > Seamus; and — > Dean, 
who is mentioned in the US editions of the book as being a "tall, black boy," but is not described in the British 
editions of the book. Harry also has an episode of pain in his scar when he is scrutinized by — > Professor Snape, the 
Potions teacher. 

After the meal, there are a few start-of-term announcements, including one that catches Harry's ear: "this year, the 
third floor corridor on the right-hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to die a very painful 
death. " Harry asks — > Percy if Dumbledore is serious, and Percy replies that he must be. 

Now that the meal is finished, it is time to sing the school song: "everyone pick their favorite tune", said 
Dumbledore, "and off we go!". Afterwards, they leave for their dormitories. Percy leads the first-year Griffindors 
through a very convoluted path, though all paths through Hogwarts seem convoluted; Harry is bemused by the 
paintings on the walls, whose occupants are aware of the passing students and comment on them. They are briefly 
harassed by — > Peeves, but eventually reach the entrance to the Gryffindor common room, which is guarded by — > a 
portrait of a fat lady. Percy gives the password {"Caput Draconis"), and everyone goes up to their dormitories and to 
bed. During the night, Harry has a dream, involving Quirrell's turban and Malfoy turning into Snape. Harry wakes up 
sweating, and goes back to sleep, and when he wakes up the next morning he doesn't even remember the dream. 

Analysis 

The purpose of this chapter seems to be to introduce us to the houses in Hogwarts; to give us our first taste of the 
character of the Headmaster, Albus Dumbledore, and to introduce us also to the idea that Harry's scar can be a 
barometer, if you will, of the passing scene. We are also given another indication of Harry's fame in the Wizarding 
world, through the response made by the rest of the school when his name is called out for Sorting. 

We are also given some ideas about how the Wizarding world differs from the Muggle world that Harry has been 
trapped in so far. The understanding of the operation of the Wizarding world here is not only appropriate to Harry's 
age level (11), but also is at about the level of detail that would be comprehended by someone of that age who was 
suddenly introduced to the magical world. For instance, the food of the banquet fades in on the plates; Harry doesn't 
stop to wonder who prepared it or how it got placed on the plates. That curiosity and the resultant understanding 
doesn't come about for another three years. 

Harry's dream is, of course, foreshadowing of the main plot line of this book. At this point, the reader does not know 
enough to interpret this dream, but may understand that there is some connection between the pain Harry is feeling in 



Chapter 7: The Sorting Hat 17 

his scar, and Quirrell's turban. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Do you think Dumbledore is really as "barmy" as seems to be popularly believed? If not, is his behaviour an 
affectation, or does he have wisdom that other wizards don't understand and thus dismiss as eccentricity? 

Greater Picture 

In this book, we see half of a timeline contradiction. At Nearly Headless Nick's — > deathday party, commemorating 
the five-hundredth anniversary of his death, in — > Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, his death is stated to 
have been on 1492-10-31. However, in this chapter, Nearly Headless Nick states that he has been dead for nearly 400 
years. It is assumed that this is an error on the part of the author, and in fact the author has corrected this, by making 
Nick say that he has been dead for nearly 500 years, in later editions of this book. 

As mentioned in the Greater Picture section for that Deathday Party chapter, the date of Nearly Headless Nick's 
death can be used to determine a timeline for the entire series, leading us to all the specific dates of the book. 
However, this timeline is not critical to the plot or events of the books, as it only affects the interactions between the 
events in the books and the Muggle world, and those interactions are very few. 

The byplay between Harry and the Sorting Hat becomes more germane in the course of the second book, — > Harry 
Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, and later in illustrating the difference between Harry and Voldemort. While the 
Hat recognizes qualities in Harry bestowed on him by the connection between him and Voldemort, it is ultimately 
Harry's exercising of choice and free will that leads to his assignment to Gryffindor. 

Harry's dream may actually be a foreshadowing of events in the entire series, rather than in just this book. It may be 
that his dream is actually an unconscious attempt by — > Voldemort to influence Harry's actions by means of — > 
Legilimency, as he will do again in — > Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. While this is neither confirmed 
nor refuted by later events, it is unlikely that it is a conscious use of Legilimency by Voldemort; Voldemort did not 
start deliberately using Legilimency on Harry in that book until he became aware of the existing connection — > at 
about Christmas. 

We are meant to believe that the explosion of pain in Harry's scar is because Snape is looking at him. It is true that 
Snape is not pleased to see him; at that distance, Snape can only see the similarity between Harry and his father — > 
James. We will find out that James and Snape were in the same year at Hogwarts, and that they did not get along. In 
actual fact, the pain in Harry's scar is because Voldemort, then riding Quirrell, is either looking at Harry through 
Quirrell's turban, or is using Legilimency to observe the room, and has just detected Harry. 

Harry's scar did not hurt when he first met Quirrell in the Leaky Cauldron, and Quirrell's skin did not burn when they 
shook hands there (see — > The Man with Two Faces), because he wasn't wearing the turban at the time, and hence 
Voldemort was not possessing him from the back of his head. Quoting from the text, at the welcoming feast, "Harry 
spotted Quirrell, too, the nervous young man from from the Leaky Cauldron. He was looking very peculiar in a large 
purple turban." (Emphasis ours.) This implies that this is the first time Harry has seen him wearing the turban. 



Chapter 8: The Potions Master 18 



Chapter 8: The Potions Master 



Synopsis 

— > Harry finds his first few days at — > Hogwarts very trying indeed. The other students keep looking at him as 
though he is some kind of celebrity, which makes him nervous. The castle itself is very convoluted and he and — > 
Ron repeatedly get lost on their way to class and are late, or are caught accidentally trying to enter forbidden areas, 
which puts them (on the very first day at Hogwarts) on the wrong side of — > the caretaker, Argus Filch. And the 
lessons themselves are difficult. 

Harry meets his teachers for the first time: — > Professor Sprout for Herbology, — > Professor Binns for History of 
Magic, and — > Professor Flitwick for Charms. He also has — > Professor McGonagall for Transfiguration, and — > 
Professor Quirrell for Defence Against the Dark Arts, though of course he has met them before. 

At breakfast on Friday, Harry receives his first message by owl post, from — > Hagrid, inviting him to tea after class; 
he then attends his first Potions class with — > Professor Snape, a double length class shared with Slytherin first-years. 
This class does not go at all well, with Snape singling Harry out, and ridiculing him for his lack of magical 
knowledge. Snape, who apparently disapproves of Harry's celebrity status, continues to be harder on Harry than even 
the other Gryffindors in the class. In particular, when — > Neville melts the cauldron he shares with — > Seamus, Snape 
unjustly holds Harry partly responsible and penalizes Gryffindor House one point because of it. 

When Harry (and Ron) get to Hagrid's hut for tea, Harry finds a clipping from — > the Daily Prophet, which mentions 
the robbery from Gringotts Wizarding Bank. Hagrid refuses to talk about it, and Harry ends up coming to the 
conclusion that the vault that was burglarized was in fact the one that Hagrid himself had emptied during their trip to 
— > Diagon Alley. 

Analysis 

In this chapter we meet most of the Hogwarts teachers, at least most of the ones who will be major characters in this 
and later books. We discover that while most of the teachers are delighted to have Harry in their classes, Snape is 
less than impressed. As we progress through the books, Snape's singling out of Harry becomes a regular occurrence. 
Later we find out precisely why Snape hates Harry so much; for now, we are led to believe that it is Harry's celebrity 
that Snape dislikes. This will be reinforced in the next book, where we will see Snape's reaction to a celebrity 
teacher. 

In the conversation with Hagrid at the end of this chapter, we see Harry's urge to understand and investigate, a 
quality which equips him to solve (with help) the many mysteries which will be put before him throughout his 
seven-year story. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1 . Why didn't Snape call on Hermione when she raised her hand? 

2. Why does Snape hate Harry so much? 

Greater Picture 

Snape's great dislike for Harry becomes a main feature in many of the later books. 

This first ever Potions class will actually foreshadow a lot of the events in the books. Snape says, in his introduction, 
that he can teach the students to "brew fame, bottle fortune, and even stopper death." The sheer number of 



Chapter 8: The Potions Master 19 

connections of this scene, as described below, to later parts of the series, had led many fans to speculate, following 
the events at the end of — > the sixth book, that — > Dumbledore and Snape had conspired to fake Dumbledore's death. 
In fact, the potion mentioned had been used in that book, although we do not find out about that until — > late in the 
final book; Snape had, in fact, prevented or reversed Dumbledore's death from his touching a cursed ring. The 
discussion of aconite or monkshood, and the associated Draught of Living Death, reappear in the sixth book, first 
when — > Professor Slughorn has Harry's class brew this potion, and possibly (in the US edition only) on the top of 
the Astronomy tower, when Dumbledore is trying to convince — > Draco to switch sides, and tells him that can make 
Draco and all his family appear to be dead. The — > bezoar that Snape asks Harry to describe will play a small role in 
— > the fourth book, and a much larger one in — > the sixth book. 

The fact that Harry and Ron constantly get lost shows the magical qualities and enormity of the castle. Hogwarts has 
many secrets, many of which will become very important later in the series. 



Chapter 9: The Midnight Duel 



Synopsis 

— > Harry is dismayed to find out, in his second week of — > school, that flying lessons are also going to be shared with 
— > Slytherin house, and because he has no idea about how to fly, he will be subject to ridicule from — > Draco 
Malfoy, who has become as well-loved by Harry as — > cousin Dudley. 

— > Neville receives a — > Remembrall from his grandmother, which Draco attempts to steal, but is prevented from 
doing so by the arrival of — > Professor McGonagall. 

At the flying lesson, Neville falls off his broom and injures himself. The instructor, — > Madam Hooch, takes him off 
to the hospital wing, ordering the rest of the class to stay on the ground. Draco spots Neville's Remembrall on the 
ground, and takes off to place it in a tree for Neville to fetch later. Harry flies off after him, and finds that flying on a 
broomstick is something he is naturally good at. Draco changes his mind and throws the Remembrall away in the air, 
but Harry dives after it and catches it mid-air, just inches above the ground. He is immediately accosted by Professor 
McGonagall, who has been watching from her office. Professor McGonagall drags him away from the lesson, 
apparently in disgrace, but then introduces him to the captain of the Gryffindor — > Quidditch team, — > Oliver Wood, 
and tells him Harry's the new Seeker. 

Surprised to find Harry at dinner that evening, Draco challenges Harry to a Wizard's Duel in the trophy room at 
midnight. — > Ron volunteers to be Harry's second. As Harry and Ron leave the common room later that night, 
circumstance adds Neville and — > Hermione to the party. As they reach the trophy room, they hear — > Filch looking 
for them. Evidently Draco had no intention of showing up, but simply sent Filch after Harry to get him in trouble. 
Making a run for it because — > Peeves yelled that he found students out of bed, Harry's group end up in the forbidden 
third-floor corridor, looking for a place to hide. Though they do avoid Filch, they are dismayed to find that their 
hiding place is occupied also by a huge three-headed dog. Managing to escape, they return to the common room, 
where Hermione points out that the dog was standing on a trap door and apparently guarding something. Harry leaps 
to the conclusion that the dog was guarding the package that — > Hagrid had taken from the vault at — > Gringotts. 

Analysis 

This is one of the happiest chapters, at least initially, of Harry's early school career. We've seen how he felt initially 
out of place — apart from the natural dislocation of being in a new school, Harry has had to deal with sudden 
celebrity, and the associated ongoing feeling that he's a bit of a fraud. This is compounded by the fact that he doesn't 
seem to be able to do magic with the natural fluidity of some of his peers, such as Hermione (it seems that she knows 
anything that can be learned from a book, while Harry has to muddle along). Harry is also concerned that his years of 



Chapter 9: The Midnight Duel 20 

living among Muggles, particularly those Muggles, may have crippled his magical abilities — all the other students 
will have had magical upbringings and will bring an understanding to the school that he does not have. 

In this situation, imagine his joy to discover that flying on a broomstick is something magical that he can do, not 
only naturally and well, but better than anyone else in the class. Compound this with the discovery that his father 
also flew well, that he will not have to attend further flying classes with the Slytherins, that the school will be 
providing him with a top-quality broom for use in Quidditch matches... and you can see that by dinner time, Harry 
could likely fly from sheer joy, without needing a broom. 

The Wizards' duel, which may appear somewhat arbitrary, is a natural progression; Draco has been humiliated, and 
he must have his revenge. And for Draco, betraying Harry (and, peripherally, Ron) to Filch would be every bit as 
satisfying as beating him, if he could, personally, at a duel, and carries much less risk of further humiliation — what if 
Harry met him at the duel and actually beat him? This is also a glimpse of the lack of courage to act for himself 
which will later land Draco in more trouble than he can imagine. 

It is also necessary for Harry to find clues to the location of Hagrid's grubby little package. It will seem that many 
different people are all seeking that one small thing... and Harry of course will have to know where it is if he is to do 
his part in keeping it safe. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

The trap door under the three-headed dog Fluffy is one of the many Hogwarts secrets foreshadowed in the previous 
chapter. The trap door also provides a huge question to be answered in this series: "What is under the trap door?" If 
the dog is guarding Hagrid's parcel, then one must question what else could lie beneath the floors of the castle. 
Hogwarts holds many secrets that will be discovered in later books. 



Chapter 10: Halloween 21 



Chapter 10: Halloween 



Synopsis 

The next morning, — > Harry receives a long, thin package in the morning post. The attached note warns him not to 
open it at the table, that it is a — > broom, and is signed "— > Professor M. McGonagall." — > Malfoy is already 
dismayed that Harry and — > Ron apparently escaped his plan to have them thrown out, and so arranges to find out 
what is in the package. Discovering that it is a broomstick, he informs — > Professor Flitwick of his discovery, and is 
then further dismayed that not only does the staff know about this breach of the rule that first-years are not allowed 
to have broomsticks, but they also approve of it. 

That evening, as directed, Harry goes down to the — > Quidditch pitch, where he meets — > Oliver Wood. Oliver 
explains the rules of the game, and does some basic practice with Harry. After this, Oliver has the team practicing 
three evenings a week; Harry of course is practicing as well. 

A month and a half passes; and it is Hallowe'en. Professor Flitwick decides that the class is ready to actually use the 
spell to make things float that they have been learning (— > Wingardium Leviosa). — > Hermione corrects Ron's 
pronunciation of the incantation and is the first to succeed. Later Ron says to Harry that Hermione is unbearable and 
that is why she has no friends. Hermione overhears them and runs crying into the girls' bathroom. 

During the Hallowe'en feast that evening, — > Professor Quirrell bursts into the Great Hall, hysterical, announcing the 
appearance of a — > mountain troll in the dungeons. As they are being shepherded back to their common room, Harry 
and Ron remember that Hermione is still in the bathroom, and head off to inform her of the troll. On the way, they 
see — > Professor Snape apparently headed for the forbidden third floor corridor. They then find the troll, which 
attacks Harry, Ron and Hermione in the bathroom. Frightened, Ron calls out the first spell that comes to his head, 
Wingardium Leviosa, which causes the troll's club to float into the air and later crash down on its head, leaving it 
unconscious. Upon the arrival of the teachers, Hermione lies to Professor McGonagall and says that it was her idea 
to try to defeat the troll, and that Harry and Ron had arrived just in time to save her. Professor McGonagall chides 
Hermione and takes away five points from Gryffindor for her action, but awards Harry and Ron five points apiece 
for defeating the troll. From then on, Hermione becomes friends with Harry and Ron. 

Analysis 

In the early part of the chapter, we see Harry once again receiving great joy from his flying ability. The fact that he 
has been presented with a world-class racing broom, and that he is able to put it so lightly through its paces, is very 
heartening for him. Flying and Quidditch are quickly becoming his centering point; he can retreat to the air or the 
pitch when things become too confusing to bear. 

JK Rowling has said: "When we were editing 'Philosopher's Stone' my editor wanted me to cut the scene in which 
Harry, Ron and Hermione fight the troll. Although I had accepted most of the smaller cuts he wanted me to make I 
argued hard for this one. Hermione, bless her, is so very annoying in the early part of 'Philosopher's Stone' that I 
really felt it needed something (literally) huge to bring her together with Harry and Ron." Reference This is the 
beginning of the change in Hermione. At this point, we are starting the process of having her turn into a sympathetic 
character; previously, she had been the two-dimensional goody-two-shoes grind, and now we very suddenly see that 
there is some hope for her. This is also the first example of the "trio" working together, and their success when their 
skills are combined indicates how powerful and vital this friendship will be in the greater story. 



Chapter 10: Halloween 22 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

Harry receives his broom, which he becomes very attached to in the later books, as flying is the one thing he is best 
at in his year. One of the most devastating moments in the coming books will be when this broom is destroyed; and 
throughout the series, he will be periodically deprived of flight and will suffer because of this. 

Hermione suddenly appears in a more sympathetic light by lying to save Harry and Ron, a key hint towards how her 
caring and thoughtfulness will be essential to the Trio's success across later years. The bond between the Trio, first 
formed here, is arguably the most important relationship in the whole story. 

References 

[1] http://www.jkrowling.com/textonly/en/extrastuff_view.cfm?id=8 



Chapter 11: Quidditch 



Synopsis 

— > Quidditch season starts in November, and — > Harry is lucky to have — > Hermione as his friend, because the extra 
practices are taking away his homework time, and it is only Hermione's help that allows him to get through it all. 
Also, she has become a bit more relaxed about breaking rules, so when she, Harry, and — > Ron are out in the 
courtyard one day, she creates a small wizard fire to keep them warm. — > Professor Snape, seeing them there, 
confiscates the book Harry was reading, Quidditch Through the Ages, on a pretext. Harry and Ron notice that he is 
limping. 

That evening, Harry decides to ask Snape to return the book. Hoping to catch him with other teachers so as to defuse 
his anger, he looks into the staff room. There he finds Snape with a very bad wound on his leg tended by — > Filch, 
and talking about something with three heads that apparently injured him. Snape notices Harry and, enraged, orders 
him out of the staff room. Harry, Ron, and Hermione jointly decide that his injury is likely caused by the 
three-headed dog in the forbidden third floor corridor. 

The following morning is the day of Harry's first Quidditch match, which would be against — > Slytherin. The match 
proceeds well, until Harry's broom starts acting strangely. Hermione notices that Professor Snape is staring fixedly at 
Harry and muttering, and comes to the conclusion that he is jinxing it. To stop this, she runs across the stands, 
knocking — > Professor Quirrell over in the process, and sets Snape's robes on fire, thus breaking his concentration. 
Regaining control of the broom, Harry dives for the pitch, in the process nearly swallowing the Snitch and thus 
winning the match. 

After the match, Harry, Ron, and Hermione are discussing events in — > Hagrid's hut. Hagrid voices disbelief that 
Snape could have been jinxing Harry's broom. Harry mentions that Snape had apparently run afoul of the 
three-headed dog, which Hagrid accidentally identifies as "Fluffy". Hagrid later mentions that whatever he's 
guarding, "that's between — > Professor Dumbledore an' Nicholas Flamel — " thus accidentally providing another clue 
to the nature of the object being guarded. 



Chapter 1 1 : Quidditch 23 

Analysis 

Hermione's intelligence and generosity are already proving useful, if only in the small (comparative to what comes 
later) matter of homework. 

It is also quite clear now that someone has malicious intentions against Harry. It certainly seems obvious that it is 
Snape, from the events in this chapter. We also have seen that Snape seems to have a particular interest in the 
forbidden Third Floor corridor, the trap door, and perhaps what is underneath it. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Why would Snape treat his own leg wound, or get assistance from Filch, instead of visiting — > Madam Pomfrey 
in the Hospital Wing? 

Greater Picture 

There is one timing issue in this chapter, which perhaps adds to the suspicion on Snape (as opposed to Quirrell). As 
Hermione is rushing along the teacher's row to reach Professor Snape, she knocks Professor Quirrell over; but then 
"It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realize that he was on fire." Thirty seconds is a long time, when you're 
trying to counter a jinx or doing something that requires that level of concentration; so for thirty seconds Snape is 
trying to stop a jinx that is no longer going on, because Quirrell has been knocked over and has had his concentration 
broken. It is possible that the author meant something closer to five seconds, which would be more reasonable all 
around. 

As can be seen here, if the Trio have a weakness it is a tendency to become stubbornly fixed on a single idea; their 
determined belief that Snape has malevolent intentions could have had nasty consequences at the Quidditch match 
had luck not favoured them. 

In what has been hailed as one of the better displays of the interconnectedness of the series, the fact that Harry 
catches the Snitch in his mouth will become a plot point in — > the seventh book. 



Chapter 12: The Mirror of Erised 24 

Chapter 12: The Mirror of Erised 

Synopsis 

Now that they have the name "Nicholas Flamel", — > Hermione, — > Ron, and — > Harry are spending all their spare 
time in the library, trying to find out who he is, a pastime that annoys — > Hagrid, when he finds out about it. Despite 
searching for a fortnight, however, they have not found him by Christmas break, when Hermione returns home for 
the holidays. Ron is staying at Hogwarts because his parents are going off to visit their son — > Charlie in Romania 
and Harry is staying because Hogwarts is more of a home to him than — > Privet Drive ever could be. Hermione 
reminds them to keep looking for information on Flamel. 

On Christmas Day, both Harry and Ron receive gifts. Among Harry's are a sweater from — > Mrs. Weasley, and an — > 
Invisibility Cloak from an anonymous sender. The note with the cloak says that it had been — > Harry's father's, and 
advises him to use it well. 

Christmas Dinner is very merry, including various magical accessories and truly amazing amounts of food. 

Following dinner, Harry remembers the Invisibility Cloak, and decides to explore the Restricted section of the 
library in the hopes of finding Flamel's name. The first book he selects, however, screams when opened, causing 
Harry to break his lamp, and attracts — > Filch. On the run from Filch, he ends up in a room containing a — > magic 
mirror, which shows him standing amidst a crowd of people. On inspection, this crowd turns out to be his parents 
and relations — not the Dursleys, but his magical relatives. 

Harry wakes Ron up and brings him down also to see this mirror, so that Ron can see Harry's parents, but Ron 
instead sees himself with a Head Boy's badge, and holding the Quidditch Cup. 

Harry repeats his visit to the mirror a few times, eventually being surprised in the act by — > Professor Dumbledore. 
Dumbledore identifies the mirror as the Mirror of Erised, and that it shows "only the deepest desire of our hearts". 
When asked what he sees when he looks into the mirror, Dumbledore replies that he sees himself holding a pair of 
socks, which Harry suspects is a lie. Dumbledore then says that he is going to hide the mirror, and asks Harry to not 
seek it out again. 

Analysis 

Family has recently become very important to Harry: raised by the Dursleys, who barely mask their contempt for 
him, Harry was largely unaware of his lack. Recently, though, exposure to Ron Weasley and his family has allowed 
Harry to begin to understand what it feels like to be part of a family, and to have people who are concerned about 
him. He is touched when Mrs. Weasley, knowing that he wouldn't be receiving many gifts from other people, sends 
him Christmas presents. 

By looking in the Mirror of Erised, Harry gets his first glimpse of his real family. He is transfixed by the sight of his 
parents and relatives he never knew, and so continues to come back to look in the mirror at his parents. Dumbledore 
explains the way the mirror works, and it is apparent at this point in his life, Harry wishes more than anything to 
have a normal life with his family restored to him. 



Chapter 12: The Mirror of Erised 25 

Questions 
Further Study 

1 . When Harry asks Dumbledore what he sees when he looks into the Mirror, Dumbledore replies that he sees 
himself holding a pair of socks. Is that really what Dumbledore sees? 

Greater Picture 

Harry's desire to have an ordinary, peaceful life with a family around him is a feeling which will follow him 
throughout his story. It will also serve as an incentive that will drive him to do what he needs to do. 

After asking what Dumbledore sees in the mirror, Harry thinks to himself that he has just asked a very impertinent 
question, and much later in the series comes to the conclusion that Dumbledore had not been entirely truthful. It is 
revealed much later, in — > Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, that Dumbledore's heart's desire is the same as 
Harry's — to be reunited with his departed family, especially his mother — > Kendra and sister — > Ariana. 

At this stage in the books, we do not know who had returned the Invisibility Cloak to Harry. At the end of this book, 
it will be revealed that, in fact, Dumbledore was the sender. However, that raises a very large question. When Harry 
is caught at the Mirror of Erised, Dumbledore mentions that he does not need a cloak to be invisible. We will learn 
later that invisibility can be provided by a spell, the — > Disillusionment charm, and we can guess that Dumbledore is 
very good at it. Why, then, would Dumbledore want James Potter's Invisibility Cloak? He has no need for it, after all. 

This last point is particularly of interest, as the author mentions that it is a peculiarly never-asked question .It will 
be a key issue in the final book in the series, as it turns out that the Cloak is one of the Deathly Hallows of the title. It 
should be noted that there is technique involved in concealing the fact that this is even a question. The previous 
ownership of the Invisibility Cloak is separated in the text from Dumbledore's statement that he doesn't need one, by 
several exciting events, even though the two do fall in the same chapter, and the admission that it was Dumbledore 
who had been keeping the Cloak for the intervening decade is several chapters ahead. This separation of the three 
parts of the paradox removes the immediacy that makes it a question that the reader thinks about. 

Dumbledore's interest in this Cloak will be echoed again in — > the seventh book. 

References 

[1] http://www.jkrowling.com/textonly/en/extrastuff_view.cfm?id=23 



Chapter 13: Nicholas Flamel 26 



Chapter 13: Nicholas Flamel 



Synopsis 

— > Quidditch practice is picking up again as — > Harry and the rest of the team prepare for an upcoming match against 
Hufflepuff. Harry is horrified to be told that — > Professor Snape will be refereeing this match, as are — > Ron and — > 
Hermione when he tells them. 

Harry gives a Chocolate Frog to — > Neville, who gives him back the card; Harry sees that it is the card of — > Albus 
Dumbledore, and suddenly recalls that it was on that card that he had seen Nicholas Flamel's name: Professor 
Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945, for the discovery of the 
twelve uses of dragon's blood, and his work on alchemy with his partner Nicholas Flamel. The mention of Alchemy 
reminds Hermione of a book she had taken out of the library which mentions Flamel as being now 665 years old. 
Further research leads Harry, Ron, an Hermione to the conclusion that the mysterious package Hagrid had brought to 
the school was in fact the only known instance of the — > Philosopher's Stone. Eternal life and all the gold you could 
want. No wonder Snape wants it, they think... 

Harry decides to play Quidditch even with Snape refereeing. In the course of the game, a fight breaks out in the 
stands between some of the Gryffindors (notably Ron and Neville) and some of the Slytherins (led by — > Draco 
Malfoy). The match lasts only about five minutes as Harry spots and catches the Snitch before Snape has been able 
to do more than award one penalty to Hufflepuff. 

After the match, Harry sees Snape enter the — > Forbidden Forest. Using his broom, he is able to get close enough to 
eavesdrop on a conversation between Snape and — > Professor Quirrell. The conversation confirms Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione's belief that the package is the Philosopher's Stone, and leads them to conclude that Quirrell is the only 
thing standing between Snape and the Stone. 

Analysis 

Much of this chapter actually serves as reinforcement. 

• Harry gives Neville the Chocolate Frog because Neville has been jinxed by Draco Malfoy. This serves to 
reinforce both Draco's disdain for rules and for Gryffindors, and Neville's relative incompetence. 

• Snape's refereeing of the match allows some further reinforcement of his dislike of Gryffindor House in general, 
and Harry in particular. 

• Harry's overhearing Snape and Quirrell serves to reinforce Harry's belief, and thus also Ron's and Hermione's, that 
Snape is trying to get the Philosopher's Stone, and poor, weak Quirrell is trying to stop him. 

The only major plot advance at this point is the discovery that it is, in fact, the Philosopher's Stone that is being 
guarded on the one hand, and sought on the other. We are given some clue as well to its usefulness by being told the 
length of time that Flamel has been alive. Clearly, some of the Stone's function has to do with prolonging life. We 
will find out a bit more than this shortly. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

At one point in this chapter, Harry notices that he seems to be running into Snape far more frequently than usual. He 
wonders if Snape knows that he, Ron, and Hermione have found out about the Philosopher's Stone, and he has the 
horrible feeling that Snape can read minds. Harry has felt this to a greater or lesser degree a number of times, but this 
is the first time he has expressed the thought this clearly, even to himself. This will be a recurring concern for Harry, 
and will come to full fruition in — > the fifth book in the series. 



Chapter 13: Nicholas Flamel 27 

Once again, Harry's single-minded view of Snape's character twists his perspective on the things he witnesses, so 
that he can only see one possible interpretation. This persistent prejudice towards Snape will come back to haunt 
Harry as the larger story reaches its climax. 

We do not yet have any idea that — > Voldemort is still around, apart from — > Hagrid's earlier comment that he thinks 
Voldemort was "too evil to die". We will, however, receive a large hint in that direction shortly, when a — > Centaur 
speaks with Harry about the uses of — > Unicorn blood. 

Chapter 14: Norbert the Norwegian Ridgeback 

Synopsis 

— > Professor Quirrell, though, seems to prove stronger than expected, as Fluffy remains alert and growling behind 
the door. But with only 10 weeks left until end of the year exams, — > Hermione starts laying out timetables for 
studying and insisting that — > Harry and — > Ron do likewise. So it is when they are studying in the library that they 
find — > Hagrid taking a book out of the dragon section. Asked directly about Nicholas Flamel and the — > 
Philosopher's Stone, he promises to tell them something about it, but not in the library; students aren't supposed to 
know about it. 

At Hagrid's hut, they find out that the Stone is protected by Fluffy, and enchantments by Professors — > Sprout, — > 
Flitwick, — > McGonagall, Quirrell, — > Dumbledore, and... — > Professor Snape. This is alarming as of course Snape is 
the one who is trying to get the Stone, but to add to the confusion, it turns out Hagrid has won a dragon's egg from 
someone down in the — > village, and is planning to hatch it despite living in a wooden house. 

In due course, the egg hatches. Hagrid invites Harry, Ron and Hermione down to witness it. — > Draco Malfoy 
unfortunately overhears and sees the dragon hatch as well, through Hagrid's window. Of course, this means that they 
will have to get rid of it somehow, before Malfoy tells Professor Dumbledore. Harry has an idea: Ron's brother — > 
Charlie is working with dragons in Romania, maybe he can find Norbert (as Hagrid has named the dragon) a home. 
Hagrid is not happy about this, but finally agrees, and Charlie also agrees. 

Malfoy manages to find out about Charlie's schedule, and is waiting when Harry and Hermione (Ron being 
incapacitated by a dragon bite) carry a crated Norbert towards the tower where Charlie's friends will take him away. 
Harry and Hermione see him being caught by Professor McGonagall, who penalizes him twenty House points, and 
gives him detention. Harry and Hermione, safe beneath the — > Invisibility Cloak, make it to the top of the tower and 
see Norbert off, but then are caught by — > Filch on their way back to the dormitory - in their excitement, they have 
forgotten the Cloak on the top of the tower. 

Analysis 

At first glance, this chapter seems to have little purpose in the book — Norbert is introduced and sent away all in one 
chapter and never re-appears in the series, except occasionally Hagrid gets to missing him, and there is a mention in 
passing in — > the seventh book. The purpose of the chapter seems to be largely preparatory. 

Part of the purpose is making the need to get to the stone more urgent. The Trio at this point quite firmly believe, and 
with reason, that it is Professor Snape who is seeking the Stone. Knowing that Snape was involved in setting up the 
guardians for it, they are sure that he also now knows enough about the guardian spells to start making his way 
through them. 

Another part of the purpose is setting up the scene in the — > Forbidden Forest, in the next chapter. Without detention, 
there would be no need for Harry to go into the Forest, and no way for him to witness the events that occur there. 

A third part of the purpose is actually setting up the final scene in the book. As we have not reached that scene yet, 
we will not discuss it here, except to say that a victory is sweeter if it follows, and reverses, a defeat. 



Chapter 14: Norbert the Norwegian Ridgeback 28 

And finally, this chapter shines a light on part of the character of Draco Malfoy. Having found that he has an 
advantage over Hagrid and the Trio, in that he knows Hagrid is doing something horribly illegal and the Trio is 
helping him do it, he does not report this to the authorities. Instead, he holds this knowledge tight, using it to torment 
Ron in the hospital wing, and trying to get additional advantage out of the situation. This is classic Slytherin 
deviousness and ambition. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1 . How did Charlie's friends fly to the school to get Norbert if there are numerous enchantments protecting the 
school? 

Greater Picture 

As mentioned in the Analysis section, this chapter also is a significant part of the set-up for the final scenes in the 
book. Having been instrumental in losing a huge number of House Points for Gryffindor, as Harry will be in the 
opening pages of the next chapter, how much sweeter is it that he is also instrumental in winning them all back, and 
more? 

Norbert does reappear in passing in — > the seventh book. Hagrid and Charlie happen to be together at the Weasley 
home, and Hagrid inquires about Norbert. Charlie says that they are calling her Norberta now. Hagrid asks how they 
know she is female, and Charlie says that the females are more fierce. 

In this chapter we also see Harry's willingness to break rules if he has a good reason. This ability to think 
independently will be useful in later years as more and more daunting tasks are put before him. 

Chapter 15: The Forbidden Forest 

Synopsis 

When — > Filch hauls — > Hermione and — > Harry up before their head of house, — > Professor McGonagall, she already 
has — > Neville in front of her for being out and wandering the halls so late. Neville says he was on his way to warn 
Harry, which leads Professor McGonagall to believe that Harry and Hermione had made up this story about the — > 
dragon specifically to lure — > Draco out into the halls at midnight, in the hopes of getting him detention. She assigns 
detention for all three of them, and penalizes each of them fifty House points. (She had earlier penalized Malfoy 
twenty points and given him detention.) In one night, Harry has been involved in an action that bumped Gryffindor 
to the bottom of the standings in House points. He resolves not to get involved in anything else except schoolwork, 
and to avoid anything that might cost more House points. 

Detention takes place about a week before exams. Filch meets Harry, Hermione, Neville, and Draco in the Entrance 
Hall, and takes them down to — > Hagrid's hut. Hagrid tells them that something in the — > Forbidden Forest has been 
killing — > unicorns, and tells them that they are going to separate into two parties, and follow the trails of unicorn 
blood from a wounded unicorn in hopes of finding what it is, and if necessary put the unicorn out of its misery. 
Hagrid, Harry, and Hermione will be one party, Draco and Neville, with Fang (Hagrid's boarhound), will be the 
other. They separate. Hagrid hears something unexpected, a sort of slithery sound, but can't find what caused it. 
Hagrid's party then meets with — > Ronan the — > centaur. Ronan makes a few remarks about astronomy, and the party 
is then joined by — > Bane, another centaur, who also comments on astronomy. Hagrid leaves the centaurs, then 
Hermione sees red wand sparks, and Hagrid runs off to investigate, leaving Harry and Hermione standing on the 
path. 



Chapter 15: The Forbidden Forest 29 

It turns out Draco had frightened Neville, and he had panicked and sent up the sparks. Hagrid, figuring Harry would 
be harder to scare, re-groups Harry with Draco and Fang, taking Hermione and Neville. After about an hour, Harry 
and Draco find the unicorn, dead. Then they hear the slithery noise again, and a hooded figure appears and starts 
drinking the unicorn's blood. Malfoy and Fang run away. The hooded figure starts advancing on Harry, whose scar 
starts searing with pain. 

A centaur appears and chases away the hooded figure. He introduces himself as — > Firenze, tells Harry that the forest 
is not a safe place for him, and offers him a ride back to Hagrid. Ronan and Bane gallop alongside, angry at Firenze 
for allowing a human to ride him "as if he were a common mule", and also for interfering with the portents of the 
heavens. Firenze departs with Harry, saying that he will fight the evil, even alongside humans if he must. 

As they head back to Hagrid, Firenze explains that unicorn blood will keep you alive, "even if you are only an inch 
from death", but it will be a cursed sort of half-life. Harry wonders why that would be better than death. Firenze says 
maybe the hooded figure is waiting for something stronger, that will restore him to full life. Harry realizes that this 
means the Elixir of Life, a product of the — > Philosopher's Stone, and comes to the conclusion that the hooded 
creature is — > Voldemort, who is probably only somewhat alive, as Hagrid had said back in July. They reach Hagrid 
at this point, who lets the students return to the castle. Harry then tells Ron and Hermione what has been happening 
overnight, and they conclude that Voldemort is now just waiting for — > Professor Snape to get the Stone, and then 
will reappear to kill Harry. 

There is one last surprise in the night: when Harry reaches his bed as dawn nears, he finds his — > Invisibility Cloak, 
neatly folded, with a note: "Just in case. " 

Analysis 

In this chapter we have learned that it is quite likely that Voldemort is still alive, even if only just, and that he is 
taking measures to return to life. We are also introduced to the Centaurs who inhabit the forest, and get a taste of 
their feelings about humanity and Wizard-kind. In particular, we can see, even after exposure to only three centaurs, 
that there are clearly factions among them, those like Ronan and Bane who would have nothing to do with Humans, 
and those like Firenze who are willing to put aside their feelings about "inferior races" for the good of all involved. 

This is also our first introduction to the Forbidden Forest and the creatures that live in it. We can guess at this point 
that the Forbidden Forest will play at least some role in the remainder of the story. 

There is one other, small point of interest. Harry's Invisibility Cloak is returned to him by apparently the same person 
who had originally given it to him for Christmas. We recall that Harry and Hermione had left the Cloak on the top of 
the Astronomy Tower. The Astronomy Tower will be in fairly frequent use, as Astronomy students do their practical 
work there; it would be a reasonable assumption, in fact, that there would be a class up there every clear night. 
Wizards being subject to the same foibles as any other humans, we can safely guess that it is unlikely that the Cloak 
would have been returned to Harry if a student had found it. So whoever had found it must be an adult, one who is 
either commonly up on the Astronomy Tower during daylight, or else is singularly aware of everything passing in 
the school. The person in question must be a teacher, as no student would have been able to borrow the Cloak from 
Harry's father, but we cannot yet be certain which. We can, however, rule out Professor McGonagall, as Harry 
recognizes the handwriting as having been the same as on the initial note, and does not recognize it as hers, though a 
note from her accompanied his — > broom in — > September. While we, as readers, are beginning to suspect that the 
"oddly spiky" handwriting might be — > Professor Dumbledore's, Harry does not feel himself to be important enough 
to merit that level of attention from the school's Headmaster, and so dismisses the possibility. 



Chapter 15: The Forbidden Forest 30 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Ronan and Bane both comment that Mars is shining brightly. Mars is the Roman god of war. Are these comments 
meant to foreshadow upcoming events in the wizarding world? 

Greater Picture 

We will shortly find out that the unidentified figure who is killing the unicorn is, in fact, — > Quirrell. The actions of 
Quirrell, who we will later find out is entirely under the control of — > Voldemort, show that Voldemort will stop at 
nothing to regain his power. He shows no remorse for killing the unicorn, and indeed, shows no remorse for any of 
his actions that lead to others' deaths. Given that his soul has been split into pieces and stored in — > horcruxes, 
Voldemort is not quite human. While his physical appearance in a later book would seem to bear out his lack of 
humanity, we should bear in mind that Voldemort's physical appearance is likely something that he chose himself: as 
the self-proclaimed heir of — > Slytherin, and thus with great affinity for snakes, Voldemort very likely has chosen to 
model himself physically on a snake. We will find out that he didn't always look like a snake, even after he had 
started creating Horcruxes. 

Chapter 16: Through the Trapdoor 

Synopsis 

End of term exam time comes, with both written and practical tests. — > Harry can't figure out how he was able to take 
exams while worrying that — > Voldemort was about to burst through the door and kill him. With the end of exams, 
— > Ron and — > Hermione are relaxed, but Harry is not; his scar is hurting more than ever, which indicates danger is 
coming. 

It suddenly dawns on Harry that he has to check something with — > Hagrid - he needs more detail about where the — > 
dragon's egg had come from. They're not exactly the sort of thing one carries around idly after all. Hagrid, 
confronted, says he doesn't know what the man he won the egg from looked like, because he kept his cloak on. 
Hagrid also mentions that he had told this stranger that Fluffy the three-headed dog would calm right down if he was 
played a bit of music. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione now know that someone knows how to get past the three-headed dog, and they run off to 
tell — > Professor Dumbledore, but — > Professor McGonagall informs them that he is not at Hogwarts, he has been 
called away to London. They try to trail — > Professor Snape, but fail in doing so. Harry resolves to go down the trap 
door as soon as the Gryffindor common room clears; Hermione and Ron immediately elect to go with him. 

As they prepare to leave, — > Neville notices them and attempts to stop them from leaving, he can't stand to let them 
lose any more House points for — > Gryffindor. Hermione is forced to put him in a — > full body bind so they can leave 
the common room. Under the — > Invisibility Cloak, they make their way to the third-floor corridor, finding the door 
already open. Using the flute that Hagrid had given Harry for Christmas, Harry plays Fluffy to sleep and then they 
jump down through the trap door, right into a crop of — > Devil's Snare. Hermione recognizes it, and manages to 
neutralize it. From there, they end up in a chamber that they can escape only by catching a flying key with the aid of 
a — > broomstick. Naturally, Harry manages this. The next trap is a Wizard chess set. Ron navigates them across this 
by winning the game, but in the process is incapacitated. After checking that he is still alive, Harry and Hermione 
pass through a chamber in which there is a — > troll, luckily already knocked out, and move on to the next challenge, a 
logic puzzle, which Hermione solves. However, only one can proceed forward. Harry chooses to go on, sending 
Hermione back to help Ron, and to send an owl to summon Dumbledore. Harry then proceeds into the last chamber. 



Chapter 16: Through the Trapdoor 31 

And there is someone there, but it isn't Snape, and it isn't Voldemort. 

Analysis 

In this chapter we start to see the Trio working together, and the strength they have as a group. Each of the three has 
a vital role to play in helping Harry reach the — > Philosopher's Stone. No one of them, nor even two of them, could 
have succeeded in reaching the Stone. Hermione's knowledge was required to free them from the Devil's Snare and 
to defeat the logic puzzle; Harry's flying ability was required to catch the key; and Ron's chess-playing ability was 
required on the Wizard Chess board. Notably, however, they were not simply taking turns. Ron had to remind 
Hermione about making a light to evade the Devil's Snare, and Harry needed Ron's and Hermione's help on brooms 
to corner the key. 

It was mentioned earlier that a number of teachers had provided protection for the Stone. In order, that would be 
Hagrid (Fluffy), — > Professor Sprout (Devil's Snare), — > Professor Flitwick (charmed keys), Professor McGonagall 
(wizard chess set), — > Professor Quirrell (troll), and Professor Snape (potions for the logic puzzle). While we have 
been told that Professor Dumbledore has also provided protection, we have not yet seen the form his magic will take. 

The logic puzzle Hermione solves is interesting, in that we see the question, and the solution, but not the initial 
setup. The solution, as determined by Hermione, is that the smallest bottle will take you forwards, and the one at the 
right end of the line will take you back. Clearly, from the arrangement of the bottles and the associated clues, it is 
possible for Hermione to determine which potion is which. Is it possible, from the clues and Hermione's solution, to 
work backwards and determine what the arrangement must have been? In fact, it does not, as the third clue is based 
on the sizes of the bottles, which we are not told; however, it does refine it to one of two possible setups, either of 
which is uniquely solvable from the clues provided. A discussion of this puzzle, and the possible solutions, appears 
on the Discussion page for this chapter. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1 . If someone had previously passed through the room, why then were all the potions in the logic puzzle still 
present? Would that person not have had to drink the "onwards" potion at least? And if it was some form of 
magically refilling bottle, why would only Harry to be able to proceed? 

Greater Picture 

This chapter is almost pure action; there is very little here that is carried forwards to further books. However, the 
following points should be mentioned. 

Neville standing up to the Trio is the first occasion where we have seen him evince any sort of bravery. Until now, 
he has seemed to be ineffectual, very weak magically, and at the mercy of the passing scene. Here, for the first time, 
we see him standing up against opposition; futilely, to be sure, but he is standing up for what he believes. This marks 
the start of a trend of maturation and increasing strength that will result, by the seventh book, in Neville being leader 
of an underground resistance to a Dark organization. 

Hermione here shows some concern for Ron; it is impossible to judge, at this early stage, whether this is the start of 
the relationship that develops in books six and seven, but one could say that a seed has been sown here. 

It is perhaps interesting that Ron's words here to Hermione, "Are you a witch, or what?" are echoed precisely by 
Hermione, speaking to Ron near the end of — > Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. While this was certainly a 
conscious choice by the author, one must wonder whether it was meant to be a conscious choice by Hermione. 



Chapter 17: The Man with Two Faces 32 

Chapter 17: The Man with Two Faces 

Synopsis 

Note: This chapter ties up a large number of plot threads in a relatively small space. In order to catch the necessary 
high points, the synopsis must be relatively long. 

The man in the final chamber is — > Quirrell. But a changed Quirrell, no longer twitching and stuttering, no longer 
unsure of himself. Quirrell is quick to point out that being seen as ineffective, particularly alongside — > Snape, is a 
very effective disguise. Snape was suspected of all the mischief that Quirrell had done, such as enchanting — > Harry's 
— > broom in — > the Quidditch match against Slytherin — apparently Snape was working a counter-charm, and it was 
— > Hermione knocking Quirrell off his feet that stopped the enchantment. Quirrell also admits to having let the — > 
troll into the dungeons at — > Halloween, so that he could look at what was guarding the — > Stone, in which he was 
also thwarted by Snape. 

Now all that stands before him is the final guardian of the Stone, which Harry recognizes as the — > Mirror of Erised. 
While examining the Mirror, Quirrell mentions that Snape was at school with — > Harry's father, and that they hated 
each other. He also says that "his Master", which apparently means — > Lord Voldemort, is with him wherever he 
goes. When Quirrell is unable to decode the secret of the Mirror, he asks for help, and a voice tells him to "use the 
boy". Quirrel stands Harry in front of the mirror. Harry sees himself taking the Stone out of his pocket and finds that 
it is, in fact, in his pocket. He tells Quirrell that he sees himself winning the Quidditch cup, but the mysterious voice 
says he's lying and demands to speak to Harry face to face. Quirrell demurs, but eventually removes his turban to 
reveal a second face on the back of his head, that of Lord Voldemort. Voldemort orders Quirrell to seize Harry, but 
Quirrell cannot - his skin burns and blisters when he tries. Quirrell prepares to curse Harry to death but Harry grabs 
his opponent's face, and Quirrell is in too much pain to utter the jinx. But by now, the pain in Harry's head, from his 
scar, is enough to drive him out of consciousness. 

Harry wakes up in the hospital wing, with — > Professor Dumbledore in attendance. Dumbledore tells him that 
Quirrell did not get the stone, that Dumbledore arrived just in time to save Harry from Quirrell, and that the Stone 
has been destroyed. Yes, that means Nicholas Flamel and his wife Perenelle will die, but they have enough time to 
get their affairs in order, and "after all, to the well-organized mind, death is but the next great adventure." 
Dumbledore agrees with Harry that Voldemort is still out there, possibly looking for another body to inhabit, 
possibly looking for some other way to return but refuses, for the moment, to explain to Harry why Voldemort wants 
to kill him. Quirrell could not touch Harry, according to Dumbledore, because — > Harry's mother died to save him, 
and a love that strong provides protection against some forms of magic. Dumbledore also admits to having been the 
source of the — > Invisibility Cloak which Harry has been using - Harry's father had left it in Dumbledore's care. 
Dumbledore also mentions that the reason Snape seems to hate Harry so much is because Harry's father saved 
Snape's life, leaving Snape in his debt, something that has continued to bother Snape. Dumbledore then mentions 
that Harry got the Stone out of the Mirror because the enchantment on the mirror was such that if someone wanted to 
use the Stone, they would only see themselves using it, but someone who wanted to find it but not use it, would find 
it. 

After Dumbledore's departure, — > Ron and — > Hermione are allowed to visit. Harry lets them know what had 
happened in the last chamber and what Dumbledore had told him. They come to the conclusion that Dumbledore had 
allowed Harry to fight Voldemort, if he chose, rather than trying to protect him from Voldemort. 

Next day, Harry has another visitor: — > Hagrid. Hagrid is in tears, because he was the one who had given Quirrell the 
final piece of information he needed in order to figure out how to reach the Stone. Harry manages to calm him, and 
Hagrid remembers that he has a gift for Harry. The gift is a photo album, containing wizarding pictures of Harry's 
parents. 



Chapter 17: The Man with Two Faces 33 

Late in the day, — > Madam Pomfrey, the nurse, relents and lets Harry go to the end-of-term feast. There, after much 
good food, Professor Dumbledore rises to award the — > House Cup. Slytherin is in the lead, in part because without 
Harry in the final match, Ravenclaw defeated Gryffindor rather badly at Quidditch, and in part because of all the 
points Harry lost in the — > Norbert debacle. "However, recent events must be taken into account - I have some 

last-minute points to dish out." Harry, Ron, Hermione, and — surprisingly > Neville have earned between them 

enough house points to regain the lead and win the House cup for — > Gryffindor. 

Exam results appear and while Hermione, as expected, is top of her class, both Ron and Harry have managed decent 
passes, and even Neville has managed to scrape through. And finally it's time for the Hogwarts Express to take 
everybody back home. Ron and Hermione promise to write, and Ron promises to invite them both to stay with him. 
And although they have all received notes telling them they are not allowed to do magic outside of school, Harry 
knows that the Dursleys have no idea about that. "I'm going to have a lot of fun with — > Dudley this summer..." 

Analysis 

Clearly the big surprise here is that it is not Snape, but Quirrell, who is behind the ongoing attack on Harry. We 
already know of Snape's dislike of Harry, and Harry of course is equally aware of it. It is because of this dislike that 
Harry has evidently decided Snape is the main mover behind the attacks. It does not occur to Harry that there might 
be other reasons behind Snape's dislike of him, as it does not occur to him that such obvious dislike would make 
Snape the main suspect in any attack against Harry. Snape's dislike of Harry is widely known, even among the staff, 
though Dumbledore seems to discount it somewhat; it is almost certain that Snape will have been interrogated 
following the attacks on Harry and will have been cleared. Harry apparently assumes that as he has not heard of such 
questioning, it has not happened. It does not seem to occur to him that teachers might not feel a need to discuss 
disciplinary details with an 11 -year-old student. 

Many fan sites have pointed out a discrepancy in this chapter. Hermione says that she found Dumbledore in the 
Entrance Hall as she was on her way to send an owl to him. Yet the trap door is in the third-floor hallway, and the 
Owlery, we will find later, is high in the castle, on the seventh floor. Why would Hermione head down to the main 
floor on her way from the third to the seventh floor? One possible answer to this can actually be found in the Harry 
Potter films, in which we see a large central stairwell in the castle. Combine that with — > Percy's earlier warning that 
the stairways like to move, and it is entirely possible that Hermione, emerging from the third floor corridor, would 
have found herself on the side of the central stairwell away from the Owlery with no staircases leading upwards at 
that moment. On her way downwards to find a staircase that would bridge the gap, she might either have been forced 
all the way to the Entry Hall, or else happened to see Dumbledore, below her, as he returned to the castle. 

The speculation provided above is intended to quiet one of the few small issues that can hamper the enjoyment of the 
story; it is unsupported by anything in the books. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Why did Dumbledore have Harry's father's invisibility cloak at the time of his death, given that Dumbledore 
could make himself invisible without a cloak? 

Greater Picture 

In this chapter, Harry survives his second encounter with Lord Voldemort, and that which protected him the first 
time, his mother's love, protects him again, and apparently will continue to protect him. We will later learn that part 
of this protection is based on his having a home where someone of his mother's blood (in this case, her sister, Harry's 
— > Aunt Petunia) lives. This is why Harry must return to — > Privet Drive each summer, as much as he hates it. 



Chapter 17: The Man with Two Faces 34 

This is also the first place where the seeming hatred between James Potter and Severus Snape is mentioned. This is 
featured prominently in the later books, especially the — > fifth. As this apparent hatred is one of the axes on which 
the series plot turns, we will see it repeatedly over the entire story arc, and will eventually learn the full reasons for 
it. 

One of the key questions driving the series is asked here for the first time, as well, and is not answered. Harry asks 
why Voldemort is trying to kill him, and Dumbledore says that he must refuse to answer that. We will learn later that 
there is a prophecy that says that either Harry or Voldemort must die, as "neither can live while the other survives." 
Dumbledore feels that as a child of 1 1 years, Harry is still too young to learn this, arguably extremely harsh, fact. 
The prophecy will be revealed to Harry — > in four years, along with Dumbledore's reasons for withholding it. 

In this chapter, also, Dumbledore voices one of the philosophies that centers the series: "after all, to the 
well-organized mind, death is but the next great adventure." This does not, at first glance, seem to be a particularly 
useful philosophy, but it will turn out that this is the key difference between Voldemort and those who would defeat 
him. Much of the series revolves around death and the attitudes towards it. Voldemort, we will find, fears death, to 
the point of killing other people in cold blood in order to preserve his own life. Dumbledore, and to a large extent 
Harry, are prepared to die, if necessary, to destroy the great evil that Voldemort represents. It is the one who is 
prepared to meet death, on his own terms, who fully masters it; running away from death will not allow one to avoid 
it. It is because of this that Harry, we are told, is the stronger wizard when he meets Voldemort and duels him near 
the end of book 4. 



Chamber of Secrets 



Chapters 

— > Chapter 1: The Worst Birthday 

— > Chapter 2: Dobby's Warning 

— > Chapter 3: The Burrow 

— > Chapter 4: At Flourish and Blotts 

— > Chapter 5: The Whomping Willow 

— > Chapter 6: Gilderoy Lockhart 

— > Chapter 7: Mudbloods and Murmurs 

— > Chapter 8: The Deathday Party 

-> Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall 

— > Chapter 10: The Rogue Bludger 

-> Chapter 11: The Dueling Club 

— > Chapter 12: The Polyjuice Potion 

— > Chapter 13: The Very Secret Diary 

— > Chapter 14: Cornelius Fudge 

— > Chapter 15: Aragog 

— > Chapter 16: The Chamber of Secrets 

— > Chapter 17: The Heir of Slytherin 

— > Chapter 18: Dobby's Reward 



Chamber of Secrets 35 

Overview 

The second book in the Harry Potter series, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets is written from the point of 
view of the now- 12-year-old Harry Potter. The book's title refers to a chamber which was, according to legend, 
created in Hogwarts castle by one of the founders, Salazar Slytherin, at the time of his departure from Hogwarts; and 
much of the action of the book revolves around that chamber, and what may be in it, if in fact it exists. 

Book Highlights 

• New places visited: — > Whomping Willow, — > The Burrow, — > Knockturn Alley, Slytherin common room, — > 
Chamber of Secrets 

• New characters met: — > Dobby, — > Mr. Weasley, — > Gilderoy Lockhart, — > Moaning Myrtle, — > Colin Creevey, — > 
Lucius Malfoy 

• Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher: — > Gilderoy Lockhart 

• Title refers to: — > the Chamber of Secrets. 



Chapter 1: The Worst Birthday 



Synopsis 

— > Harry has returned to stay with the Dursleys for the summer holidays, and things are not running smoothly. On 
Harry's birthday, Harry and — > Uncle Vernon have an argument over breakfast, triggered by — > Dudley commanding 
Harry to pass him the bacon, and Harry informing him that he forgot the magic word. The mere mention of magic or 
anything like it is enough to send Uncle Vernon into a towering rage. 

Uncle Vernon then launches into his plans for the evening, entertaining a prospective client, who was called Mr. 
Mason. Harry's part in these plans is very simple, reiterated many times: he will remain in his room, making no 
noise, pretending not to be there. 

When Harry is sitting in the yard later that day, Dudley nastily reminds him that it is Harry's birthday and asks why 
all his "weird friends" have not even bothered to send him any cards or presents. Harry tells him he is trying to set 
the garden hedge on fire with magic; although he is only teasing, as he is not allowed to practice magic outside 
Hogwarts. But Dudley tells — > his aunt, and as a punishment for mentioning magic Harry has to work all day at 
cleaning the house. 

That evening, as Mr. and Mrs. Mason arrive, Harry is sent to his room. However, when Harry enters the room, he is 
shocked to see there is someone sitting on his bed. 

Analysis 

As is usual, this first chapter reinforces the framework for the contrast that will be echoed throughout the series 
between the magical and the mundane. In this chapter and the one following, we will see the spiritual poverty and 
deprivation of Harry's non-magical life. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Harry notices something with very large, green eyes apparently looking at him from within the hedge. What or 
who could this be? Is magic sneaking into the staunchly Muggle environs of Privet Drive? 



Chapter 1: The Worst Birthday 36 

Greater Picture 

We will find out shortly that the green eyes in the hedge belong to — > Dobby, a — > House-elf. Dobby will prove to be 
an important character throughout the remainder of the series. 

What we see, mostly, in this chapter, is the characters of the Dursleys, the family that Harry has been living with. We 
see how they remain stolidly pinned to the fabric of the everyday, and how they live by the impression they make on 
their neighbours and associates. As the series progresses, we will see some character growth and change on the part 
of Dudley; he will eventually come to realize that there may be some good in magic. Vernon and Petunia will remain 
stubbornly convinced that magic is wrong. Petunia's reasons for this belief will eventually become clear to us; 
Vernon, likely, was simply the least magical person that Petunia could think of to marry. 



Chapter 2: Dobby's Warning 



Synopsis 

The strange creature on — > Harry's bed introduces himself as — > Dobby, the — > house-elf. Dobby is unable to reveal 
the wizarding family he works for, as he starts hitting himself uncontrollably each time he tries. He also needs to 
punish himself for speaking badly of his masters and for leaving his home without consent, yet he did this in order to 
deliver Harry a dire warning: He must not return to Hogwarts for terrible events will happen at the school. Dobby is 
once again unable to provide more details. When Harry refuses to stay home from Hogwarts, Dobby taunts him 
about how his friends have not written to him all summer. When Harry asks how Dobby had known about that, he 
admits having intercepted Harry's letters hoping that if Harry felt his friends did not care about him, he would not 
want to go back to school. 

Furious, Harry chases Dobby downstairs, where the Dursleys are having dinner with the Masons. Dobby then uses 
his powers to levitate — > Aunt Petunia's cake and threatens to let it fall unless Harry promises not to return to 
Hogwarts. Harry refuses, so Dobby drops the cake, filling the Dursley's spotless kitchen with cream before vanishing 
magically. The noise attracts the attention of the Dursleys, who blame Harry. At first it seems — > Uncle Vernon 
manages to gloss things over, explaining to the Masons that his nephew is slightly disturbed, but then an owl arrives 
with a message for Harry, scaring Mrs. Mason and dashing Uncle Vernon's hopes for a huge business opportunity. 

The letter is an official warning from — > Mafalda Hopkirk at the — > Ministry of Magic. Apparently, Harry has 
violated the — > Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery by performing a Hover Charm, and the 
letter states that further use of magic on Harry's part away from school could lead to his expulsion from Hogwarts. 
Uncle Vernon tells Harry to read the letter aloud, and decides to lock Harry into his bedroom and bar the window, 
now knowing that he can not use magic to break out. 

Three days later, Harry is awoken by rattling at the bars across his window, and finds — > Ron peering in at him in the 
moonlight. 



Chapter 2: Dobby's Warning 37 

Analysis 

Harry, it turns out, is once again being manipulated by forces beyond his control. In this case, a house-elf has 
apparently decided to try and keep him away from Hogwarts, nominally for his own protection. Harry, believing in 
his own strength, seems not to consider that there could be any danger to him at Hogwarts, at least not one serious 
enough to prevent him returning to the place he feels most at home. 

The letter from the Ministry is clearly a surprise to Harry. While he had been cautioned about use of magic at home, 
he had not been aware that he was being monitored by the Ministry. Harry's obvious fear in the kitchen earlier, as far 
as we know, was occasioned purely by the concern that Vernon would hear him, and would be enraged at Harry's 
having violated the instructions he was given. Harry knows that Vernon still has significant power over him and can 
make his time most uncomfortable. Harry may also fear that Vernon may be able to prevent his returning to 
Hogwarts, a fear that seems manifest when Harry's bedroom is turned into a virtual jail cell. 

Throughout the course of this chapter, the tension gradually mounts as the chances of Harry's returning to the place 
he loves seem to grow ever more remote. With the appearance of Ron at the window, there is an immediate sense of 
relief, but associated with this comes a question: Ron, equally, is underage. Though he is now aware of the situation, 
what can he do to help Harry escape it? 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. How could Dobby, as a servant in another wizard household, be able to stop Harry's mail for all that time without 
his masters' noticing his absence? 

2. Why was Dobby's magic noticed, and not the magic that Hagrid used in the first book? 

Greater Picture 

Though we don't yet know this, as Dobby cannot tell Harry, it will turn out that Dobby is the house-elf of the Malfoy 
family. Perhaps not surprisingly, the poor condition of Dobby shows how the Malfoys treat their inferiors. We have 
already seen this attitude toward those the Malfoys deem less than themselves, as — > Draco has displayed it towards 
both Harry and Ron, and we will see that it continues almost throughout the series. It is the similarity of this shabby 
treatment of Dobby by his family, with the treatment of Ron, Hermione, and Harry by Draco, that leads the reader to 
guess, possibly even before Harry does, that Dobby is the Malfoy house-elf. 

Dobby, while never a major character, will yet prove extremely useful to Harry during the course of the series. We 
can see here that Dobby is violating orders to speak to Harry; we gather that it is because Dobby is aware of how the 
lot of House-Elves have improved since the fall of the Dark Lord, and, aware that the Malfoys are somehow 
planning mischief at Hogwarts, has taken it upon himself to warn Harry. Dobby's freely-given loyalty to Harry will 
continue throughout the series, and will only be enhanced by Harry's treating Dobby with the respect due an equal. 
The contrast between Dobby's response to Harry's needs, and his responses to the Malfoys, provides something of an 
object lesson in the value of loyalty freely given against that which is demanded. 

It should perhaps be noted here that Dobby's low expectations for treatment from humans seem to be common across 
all House Elves; we will see it again in — > Winky and — > Kreacher. Later, we will see that Ron also treats House 
Elves as menials, though both Harry and — > Hermione do not; Hermione is even moved to create a student 
organization, — > S.P.E.W., to try and get some rights for them. Perhaps Harry's being raised in a non-magical 
household, which has prevented him learning of the existence of house-elves, has also isolated him from the 
prevailing beliefs that house-elves should be treated as an under-class. 

The specific thing that the Malfoys have planned is the return of — > Tom Riddle's diary to the school. It is always 
uncertain whether — > Lucius Malfoy is entirely aware of exactly what the result of this will be; the diary, we will 



Chapter 2: Dobby's Warning 38 

later learn, had likely been given to him with information that would lead him to believe it was an anti — > Mudblood 
weapon, though not precisely how it would act. If he had known that the weapon was only barely controlled and 
somewhat indiscriminate, it is likely Lucius would have balked at putting it in proximity to his son Draco. 

It is mentioned elsewhere that stories about magic have a very real danger: by making anything possible and largely 
effortless, it becomes far too easy for the hero to succeed, and the story becomes uninteresting. The Decree for the 
Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is one of the more intriguing ways that the author has developed to 
provide limits on the magic. Harry certainly could make his life easier by judicious use of magic during his summer 
vacations, but that would remove one of the points of interest in the story. The Dursleys, annoying as they are, will 
remain a useful contrast to Harry's life in Hogwarts, and his means of dealing with them without the use of magic 
will be a way of measuring his own increasing strength of character and maturity. The Decree will also provide a 
significant point of interest in the story in later books. 



Chapter 3: The Burrow 



Synopsis 

— > Ron Weasley and his brothers — > Fred and George are outside — > Harry's window in a flying — > Ford Anglia. Ron 
says they have come to rescue him. They yank the bars off the window, freeing Harry. Fred and George gather 
Harry's — > Hogwarts belongings that are locked in the cupboard under the stairs. 

As they are leaving, — > Hedwig screeches, reminding Harry that he has forgotten her. The screeching awakens — > 
Uncle Vernon, and he barges into Harry's room as Harry is half way out the window. He grabs Harry's ankle and 
attempts to pull him back in, but Harry manages to escape, and he, Ron, Fred, and George are off to — > the Weasleys' 
home, — > The Burrow. 

On the ride there, Harry tells Ron, Fred, and George about — > Dobby, and they speculate about who owns him, 
eventually deciding that he could be the Malfoys'. Harry also learns that — > Draco Malfoy's father, — > Lucius Malfoy, 
once supported — > Lord Voldemort. 

They arrive at The Burrow, only to find — > Mrs. Weasley waiting for them. She is furious over them "borrowing" the 
car. After yelling at Fred, George, and Ron, she greets Harry warmly. While eating breakfast, Harry meets, or rather 
gets a fleeting glimpse of, Ron's sister, — > Ginny. 

As punishment for taking the car, Mrs. Weasley sets the twins and Ron the task of ridding the garden of — > gnomes, 
using a technique from Gilderoy Lockhart's Guide to Household Pests. Harry assists, even though Mrs. Weasley says 
he does not need to. 

After degnoming the garden, Harry meets — > Arthur Weasley, and learns that he works for the — > Ministry of Magic. 
He is a fan of Muggle technology and gadgets. 

Harry is overjoyed to get away from the Dursleys, and looks forward to spending the remaining summer with Ron. 

Analysis 

We mentioned, at the end of the last chapter, the question: what can Ron do? Ron is underage, and so are Fred and 
George, capable though they may be, so they cannot use magic to release Harry from his prison. However, apart 
from the flying car, which apparently does not trigger the prohibition against magic, Fred and George don't attempt 
to use magic to free Harry. The bars are pulled off his window by the car, and Fred and George pick the lock of his 
bedroom door and the lock on the cupboard under the stairs with a Muggle implement, a hairpin. Either Harry or 
Ron, it is not exactly made clear, then uses the same hairpin to pick the lock on Hedwig's cage, to allow Hedwig the 
first bit of freedom she has had all summer. It is never made clear in the series why casting a spell or presumably 
making a potion would trigger the prohibition against magic, but using a charmed object like the flying car would 



Chapter 3: The Burrow 39 

not; for some speculation on this matter, please see the article on — > The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of 
Underage Sorcery. 

— > Gilderoy Lockhart, who will play a large role in the book, is introduced in this chapter, although he is only 
mentioned by name. He is handsome ("'Mum fancies him,' said Fred in a very audible whisper"), and his solutions 
for problems look good, but only seem to work temporarily. By sunset, Harry, looking out Ron's window, can see the 
gnomes sneaking one-by-one back through the Weasley's hedge. 

Ginny Weasley is reintroduced to the series, although she still only glances at Harry from afar; every time she sees 
him (twice in this chapter), she squeaks and runs away. Says Ron, "You don't know how weird it is for her to be this 
shy, she never shuts up normally ..." This is a classic schoolgirl crush; she has built Harry up in her mind as some 
heroic figure, and now that he is actually physically in her presence, she is afraid to speak. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

Ginny's reaction to Harry makes it seem likely that their relationship is doomed. So many times, a schoolgirl crush 
simply fades over time, and Ginny's feelings to seem to have the superficiality of that sort of hero-worshiping 
relationship. Ginny, however, will be the center of several events that will bring her a great deal of maturity in a very 
short time, and her feelings for Harry will deepen as she comes to understand more about who he really is. Starting 
even before this chapter, Ginny will reward a more in-depth study, as we can see that the author writes a very 
realistic maturation for her, ending with a true romantic relationship with Harry. 

Harry, even after only a day at The Burrow, has learned what a functional family is and how it interacts with itself. 
He thinks to himself, at the end of the day, how much he feels at home there. This is what he has been missing, what 
he has wanted all these years, and what he will continue to want throughout the series. Hogwarts, we have already 
seen, provides a sort of surrogate home, a place where he knows everyone and everyone knows him, where his 
abilities are not feared and hated but welcomed. However, good as it is, there is no real family there; the teachers 
must remain, to a large extent, professionally remote in order to do their jobs. Here, in The Burrow, there are people 
who like him, who make him feel at home, and he knows that this is what he has been missing. 

Several other small points might be mentioned as well. We have already mentioned that Gilderoy Lockhart will 
re-appear in this book, and will be true to the image we already have of him: extremely attractive physically, 
plausible in his descriptions and instructions, but ultimately unreliable. The flying Ford Anglia will also have a few 
more appearances in this book. Arthur Weasley mentions one — > Mundungus Fletcher, who tried to jinx him when 
his back was turned; he, too, will reappear, and will be as shady as this brief mention leads us to expect, in the fourth 
book and each book after that. And Mr. Weasley's job with the Ministry will also prove important in later books, not 
only because it will give him the power to investigate other characters for Dark magic, but because his lack of 
ambition, his joy in what he actually does rather than the seeking of status apparently common among other Ministry 
employees, is unusual and apparently attracts attention from the likes of Lucius Malfoy. 



Chapter 4: At Flourish and Blotts 40 

Chapter 4: At Flourish and Blotts 

Synopsis 

Life for — > Harry has never been this good, far better than — > Privet Drive. Finally, he has found a family that accepts 
him, and that treats him as one of their own, rather than as an inferior. True, he still cannot do magic, but magic is all 
around him, and is an accepted part of life. 

The letters from — > Hogwarts, including Harry's, arrive at the same time. As always, the letters start with the 
reminder that the term starts September 1st, and provide the list of schoolbooks. 

Second year students will require: 

"The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2", by Miranda Goshawk 
"Break With A Banshee", by Gilderoy Lockhart 
"Gadding with Ghouls", by Gilderoy Lockhart 
"Holidays with Hags", by Gilderoy Lockhart 
"Travels with Trolls", by Gilderoy Lockhart 
"Voyages with Vampires", by Gilderoy Lockhart 
"Wandering with Werewolves" , by Gilderoy Lockhart 
"Year with the Yeti", by Gilderoy Lockhart 

Based on the list's content, Fred surmises that the new — > Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher is a witch and a fan 
of — > Lockhart. George has a more practical thought: "This lot won't come cheap." — > Mrs. Weasley says they will 
manage, although she seems worried. 

An owl arrives from — > Hermione suggesting they all meet in — > Diagon Alley. Mrs. Weasley agrees that that makes 
sense, and the boys then go off to practice — > Quidditch. On the way, they mention that — > their brother, Percy has 
been acting oddly and often remains shut up in his room. 

On the appointed day, the Weasleys head to Diagon Alley using — > Floo powder, something Harry has never done 
before. Unfortunately, he mispronounces the destination and goes one grate too far, landing in what appears to be a 
Dark Magic shop. While there, he sees — > Draco Malfoy and — > his father, and overhears a conversation between Mr. 
Malfoy and the proprietor, — > Borgin, in which it appears Mr. Malfoy is offering to sell some magical equipment 
back to Borgin. 

Harry exits the shop undetected, only to discover he was in — > Borgin and Burkes in — > Knockturn Alley, an unsafe 
area frequented by dark wizards and other unsavory characters. Fortunately, Harry is soon found by — > Hagrid, who 
steers him back to Diagon Alley. Harry finds the Weasleys and Hermione, and they proceed to Gringotts Bank. 
Harry is embarrassed by the wealth in his vault, particularly after seeing the small sum the Weasleys have to draw 
on. 

The group separates to do their shopping, agreeing to meet later at Flourish & Blotts for school books. They arrive 
there during a book-signing event. The popular author, Gilderoy Lockhart, is signing copies of his autobiography, 
Magical Me, and the long line has to be held in check by a "harassed little wizard." Spotting Harry, Lockhart drags 
him to the front and presents him with a complete set of his autographed books while posing for photos. Lockhart 
then announces that he is the new — > Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher for Hogwarts. 

Staggering away from the limelight, Harry dumps the Lockhart books into — > Ginny's cauldron; Draco Malfoy 
observes this byplay and taunts Harry. Mr. Malfoy suddenly appears, and examining one of Ginny's second-hand 
books, makes rude comments before returning it to her cauldron. — > Mr. Weasley comes over and begins arguing 
with Mr. Malfoy. The argument becomes physical; Hagrid reappears and drags the Weasleys away from the battle 
while the Malfoys stalk off. The Weasleys, Hermione, and Harry, return to the Leaky Cauldron and then back home. 



Chapter 4: At Flourish and Blotts 41 

Analysis 

This is our first exposure to Gilderoy Lockhart in person; he is handsome, charismatic, and has a legion of fans, 
comprised largely of middle-aged witches like Mrs. Weasley. He is also vain, opportunistic, and a fame-seeker who 
exploits Harry to get his photo onto the front page of — > the Daily Prophet. Lockhart's celebrity was achieved by 
writing about his many exciting adventures, and he seems to believe that everyone, most notably Harry, is as driven 
for fame as he. When the fight erupts between Lucius Malfoy and Arthur Weasley, Lockhart is heard planning to 
spin it to promote himself in the paper. 

This chapter also marks our first real exposure to Ginny Weasley's true character. When Draco insults Harry for the 
attention he gets in Flourish and Blotts with Gilderoy Lockhart, Ginny tells him to leave Harry alone, and that he 
didn't want the attention. This shows us that, despite Ginny's schoolgirl crush on Harry, she is very aware that he 
does not like the fame he gets from his history with Voldemort. It is possible that she is unable to speak to him in 
part out of fear that he will think her attention is rooted in his fame, rather than in himself. It is characteristic of a 
schoolgirl crush, however, that the person with the crush is afraid to talk to the person she has the crush on. 

Another Malfoy family member is introduced: Lucius Malfoy. Proud, rich, and arrogant, he is a strict and demanding 
parent who holds a tight rein on Draco. In the bookstore, he is insulting and bullying towards Ginny Weasley, 
although just why his attention falls on her is as yet uncertain. It is learned that the Malfoys and the Weasleys, both 
old pure-blood wizarding families, have very different ideas of what "disgraces Wizardkind." 

The argument between Lucius Malfoy and Arthur Weasley points up one of the great divisions among the characters 
in our story. Lucius is clearly scornful of Arthur's endless lobbying on behalf of the Muggles, where Arthur is 
affronted at Malfoy's apparent belief in his own superiority in ancestry. What is highlighted here is that one group of 
wizards feels themselves superior to others because of their breeding, and the fact that there are no non-Magical 
people in their bloodlines. This group has come to feel that those who cannot do magic are somehow subhuman, and 
that those wizards who choose to work with them or protect them are somehow traitors to the idea of blood purity. 
While the Weasley family is as old and pure a bloodline as any other, to the — > "pure-blood" wizards, their ongoing 
commerce with Muggles is seen as somehow demeaning them 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

Three items shown in Borgin and Burkes come back in a later book. Draco uses the Hand of Glory in — > Harry 
Potter and the Half-Blood Prince while he is departing the — > Room of Requirement. The opal necklace with the 
note warning that it was cursed is used in an attempt to kill Dumbledore, also in Harry Potter and the The 
Half-Blood Prince. And it turns out that the cabinet in which Harry is hiding will also make an appearance in that 
book. 

Lucius Malfoy's looking at one of the books that Ginny is holding is an excuse to put — > Tom Riddle's diary inside it. 
As we later find out, — > Voldemort had left the diary with Lucius, with the intent that it would be used at some point 
against Hogwarts. Lucius, not knowing exactly what the diary was, had apparently decided that, given his son's 
discouraging marks (as mentioned to Borgin), it was time to cause some problems for the school. 

While we have not seen this explicitly yet, we can already begin to guess that it is among the pure-blood families 
that Voldemort had found his allies. We see that Lucius is returning some Dark magic items to Borgin and Burkes, 
and hear him saying that it is getting dangerous for him to have them around. We also see Lucius' disdain for those 
of less pure-blood breeding than himself, and his annoyance that Draco, pureblood though he is, is not able to beat 
Hermione's grades. In the previous chapter we learned that Lucius had been believed to be one of Voldemort's 
supporters; his possession of Dark magical objects seems to lend weight to this, as we have been told that Voldemort 
was a Dark wizard. This suggests quite strongly that Voldemort may have been playing on the pure-blood belief in 



Chapter 4: At Flourish and Blotts 42 

their own superiority to fuel his initial rise to power. 

Chapter 5: The Whomping Willow 

Synopsis 

Summer is quickly over, and it is soon time to return to — > Hogwarts. After several false starts, everything is loaded 
into — > Mr. Weasley's car, the flying — > Ford Anglia. The car is magically larger inside than out, so they all fit in 
quite easily, and head to King's Cross Station. It is nearly time for the Hogwarts Express to depart; everyone is on — > 
the platform, except — > Harry and — > Ron, who cannot get through the barrier. The clock strikes 11:00 a.m and the 
train leaves, stranding Harry and Ron at the station and without any Muggle money. 

Harry suggests waiting back by the car; Ron, worried that his parents may be unable to get back out through the 
barrier (except in the US edition, where Ron states that his parents can — > apparate) and in a panic about getting to 
school, suggests flying to Hogwarts in the car. They take off, flying above the clouds except to occasionally see 
where the Hogwarts Express is. The flight is uneventful until they reach the school. On the final approach, the car 
loses power and crashes into the — > Whomping Willow, breaking Ron's wand. The massive tree pounds the car. The 
battered Ford extricates itself and lands on the ground, then ejects Harry, Ron, and their luggage before wildly 
driving off into the Forbidden Forest. 

Harry and Ron peer into Great Hall through a window, seeing that the Sorting ceremony has started. Unable to locate 
— > Professor Snape at the staff table, they speculate on why he is absent, only to find him standing behind them. He 
takes them into his office, demanding they explain themselves and wanting to know what they have done with the 
car — the — > Evening Prophet has reported that a flying car was sighted by several Muggles. Snape fetches — > 
Professor McGonagall, who requires that Ron and Harry repeat their story. She asks why they did not send an owl, 
since they actually have one. Ron admits that he did not think of that. 

— > Professor Dumbledore enters and hears the story. He says he will be writing to their parents, although they will 
not be expelled. Their punishment will be decided by Professor McGonagall, their House Head. After Snape and 
Dumbledore return to the Feast, Professor McGonagall says each will serve detention but, possibly because Ron 
points out that school hadn't actually started yet, does not deduct any House points. They have missed the Sorting 
ceremony but McGonagall says that — > Ginny was placed into Gryffindor House. She provides them sandwiches, 
telling them to eat in Snape's office and then go directly to their dormitory. 

— > Hermione meets them outside the — > The Fat Lady's portrait and gives them the password {"wattlebird"). She is 
definitely unhappy about what they did, as are Harry and Ron, but the other Gryffindors in the Common room 
applaud their audacity for driving a flying car into the Whomping Willow. 

Analysis 

We have already seen that it takes some effort to select a wand, and a reasonably large amount of money to buy one. 
We can guess that Ron, already in trouble for taking and wrecking the car, will not be likely to report to his parents 
that his wand has broken; however, we don't yet know what the effect of the wand's breaking will be. We do know 
that — > Hagrid's wand was broken when he was expelled, but that it still seems to work somewhat; we don't know 
how that compares to the damage that Ron's wand has taken. In any event, Ron is almost certainly going to try to 
make some sort of temporary repair and carry on as best he can with a damaged wand. 

We can see in this chapter that Snape dearly wants to get rid of Harry, and is hoping that McGonagall or 
Dumbledore will see fit to expel him, along with Ron. Snape is quite clearly disappointed that Dumbledore requires 
that Snape accompany him to the Great Hall, leaving Harry and Ron with McGonagall — we can see that he wants 
to witness the punishment that Harry will receive. We also see that McGonagall, though never losing her sternness, 



Chapter 5: The Whomping Willow 43 

is still trying to be fair. She likely knows that Ron will be disciplined by his mother, and chooses to lighten her own 
punishment accordingly, even though this will mean that Harry gets off relatively lightly. 

Questions 
Review 

1 . What kind of tree do Harry and Ron crash into, and with what? 

Greater Picture 

Ron's broken wand will prove to be a useful plot element throughout this book, as it will produce humorous effects at 
several places in the book, and will finally backfire at an ideal time, rendering harmless a major threat to Ron and 
Harry. It will be replaced when Ron's family wins a contest at the beginning of the next book. 

The flying Ford Anglia will also prove useful in this book, saving Ron and Harry from a colony of — > Acromantulae. 
It will not be seen after that time, however. 

The Whomping Willow proves to be an important element in — > the next book. The tree was planted over an 
entrance to a tunnel that leads from the school grounds to the — > Shrieking Shack, where, as a student, — > Lupin went 
every month during the full moon. We will see that this tunnel, which proved useful some thirty years before the 
series began, and will be an important plot item in the third book, will also be useful in — > the final book. 

It is perhaps of interest that Snape seems to believe that Harry and Ron deliberately chose to arrive at Hogwarts by 
flying car, in order to gain some fame for themselves. We will see shortly that — > Gilderoy Lockhart shares this 
misunderstanding of Harry's motives. With Lockhart this is understandable, as his main motivation is fame, but it is 
not clear why Snape has this belief; in almost every other respect, Snape seems to oppose Lockhart to the best of his 
abilities. 



Chapter 6: Gilderoy Lockhart 44 



Chapter 6: Gilderoy Lockhart 



Synopsis 

The next day begins less appealingly. — > Ron receives a — > Howler during breakfast in the Great Hall. — > Mrs. 
Weasley's voice loudly scolds him for taking the car. Ron is utterly humiliated in front of his classmates. 

— > Professor McGonagall hands out timetables; first class is double — > Herbology with the Hufflepuffs. — > Professor 
Sprout arrives late; she has been bandaging the — > Whomping Willow, "assisted" by — > Professor Lockhart who gave 
"valuable pointers." A disgruntled Professor Sprout directs the class to Greenhouse Three, which contains more 
interesting and dangerous plants like the — > Venomous Tentacula. 

Professor Lockhart draws — > Harry aside and says he understands why he and Ron took the flying car — for fame and 
recognition. Lockhart blames himself for giving Harry a taste of fame at Flourish & Blotts and ignores Harry's 
protest that he and Ron only did it to get to school. 

As Harry returns to the greenhouse, he finds that the class is preparing to transplant — > Mandrakes. The trio is joined 
by — > Justin Finch-Fletchley, a Hufflepuff, who casually mentions that he is Muggle-born and was headed for Eton 
before he got his Hogwarts letter. 

Next class is Transfiguration with Professor McGonagall. Harry seems to have forgotten all he learned last year and 
is unable to Transfigure his beetle into a coat button. Ron is having problems with his wand. Although he repaired it 
with magical tape, it is producing grey smokey clouds and unexpected noises. 

After lunch, Harry is cornered by — > little Colin Creevey, who wants to take Harry's picture to show his parents that 
he has actually met "Harry Potter." Overhearing this, — > Draco begin badgering Harry about signing photos. 
Lockhart comes over and forces Harry to pose for a photo, then hauls him away for some "fatherly advice" on 
handling fame. They enter — > Defence Against the Dark Arts class together, although Harry hides in the back. 

Lockhart sets a test to see how much the students knows about him. Predictably, — > Hermione, who apparently thinks 
Lockhart is wonderful, gets a perfect score. Next, Lockhart releases — > Cornish Pixies into the classroom, but he is 
unable to control them. At the bell, he flees, leaving it to Harry, Ron, and Hermione to get the remaining pixies back 
into their cage. Ron and Harry are now suspicious about how truthful Lockhart's books really are, though Hermione 
still seems to have a bad case of hero worship. 

Analysis 

In this chapter, we see one of Harry's great dislikes reinforced. As in Flourish and Blotts, Harry finds himself very 
uncomfortable with his fame, particularly as expressed by Colin, who is quite a rabid fan. Colin Creevey, in his 
enthusiasm at meeting Harry, easily forgets that Harry may not wish to be photographed and that he could, perhaps, 
not desire fame. Of course, other people take it out of context: Draco Malfoy starts to noise it about, in his usual 
way, that Harry is signing autographs, while Lockhart, quite plainly still believing that Harry is as motivated by fame 
as he is himself, lectures Harry on going too fast with his career as a famous person. In Lockhart's self-centeredness, 
he cannot see that anyone would deliberately shun the limelight, and so disregards Harry's attempts to say that he 
didn't want to be photographed. 

Also, it seems that Ron and Harry are starting to have doubts about their Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. If 
Gilderoy Lockhart has done so many wonderful things, why wasn't he able to stop the Cornish pixies? Hermione, 
who seems to have a crush on him, dismisses the possibility that Lockhart didn't have an idea about the pixies, 
saying that he has done many things, although Ron subtly remarks that he can't offer any real proof that he has done 
them apart from his word. One must wonder why Hermione is so blind to what Lockhart's abilities actually are, even 
at this early stage. 



Chapter 6: Gilderoy Lockhart 45 

Questions 
Review 

1. What is the spell Professor Lockhart uses to control the pixies? Does it work? Is there anything strange about it? 

Further Study 

1. Is Gilderoy Lockhart's teaching likely to be useful to Harry, Ron and Hermione? If not, why? 

Greater Picture 

Hermione's trust in Lockhart's abilities will continue throughout much of the book, despite significant evidence that 
he is a sham. He will never again try to demonstrate Defence Against the Dark Arts, the Dueling Club he starts up 
will prove to be a travesty, and his attempt to heal Harry's broken arm will result in Harry's arm being de-boned, 
among other less-than-stellar accomplishments. Faced with all of this, why will Hermione persist in believing in his 
abilities? The author does not provide many clues, but Ron, in later years, will indicate that he believes that it was 
Lockhart's good looks that kept Hermione in thrall, and that certainly seems to be what's happening at this stage. 
Possibly, also, Hermione has a subconscious trust in books, and a belief that if it is in a book, it must be true. In this 
chapter, she does say "Look at all the things he's done!" Ron, more skeptical, does not seem to agree with her trust 
that what's in the books actually happened. We will see this blind faith in published works again as late as — > Harry 
Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, where Hermione sticks to the published text in her copy of Advanced 
Potion-Making, despite the fact that the marginal notes in Harry's copy seem to produce much better results. 

Chapter 7: Mudbloods and Murmurs 

Synopsis 

During the first week of classes, Harry has avoided — > Professor Lockhart with some success and — > Colin Creevey 
with less, only to be awakened far too early Saturday morning by — > Oliver Wood who wants to start — > Quidditch 
practice before the other House teams. First he gives the team a long lecture on tactics. When they finally get to the 
pitch, and after doing some basic warm-ups, they find they have been pre-empted: the Slytherin team is there. A note 
from — > Professor Snape gives them permission to use the Pitch to train their new seeker: — > Draco Malfoy. It also 
seems that — > Draco's father has presented the entire Slytherin team with new Nimbus 2001 brooms that are even 
faster than Harry's Nimbus 2000. 

— > Ron and — > Hermione have appeared to watch the practice. Hermione comments that nobody on the Gryffindor 
team had to buy their way in. Malfoy, angered by the aspersion, calls Hermione a "mudblood." To retaliate, an angry 
Ron attempts to jinx Malfoy, but his broken wand backfires and he jinxes himself instead. Hermione and Harry carry 
him, belching slugs, to — > Hagrid's hut, where they narrowly miss Professor Lockhart, who is just leaving. Hagrid 
uncharacteristically criticizes Professor Lockhart, suggesting that his books may not be entirely truthful. He also 
mentions that Lockhart was the only applicant for the Defence Against the Dark Arts job. Apparently word is out 
that the position may be jinxed. 

Ron tells Hagrid he tried to curse Malfoy because he called Hermione a mudblood. Hagrid is shocked. This is 
evidently the most insulting term used to denigrate a Muggleborn's ancestry. 

Hagrid then pokes a bit of fun at Harry for giving out signed photos. He says Lockhart was displeased to hear his 
opinion that Harry was more famous than Lockhart would ever be. He then takes them out to his pumpkin patch to 
see what he has been growing. Apparently, despite being prohibited from performing magic, he has managed an 
Engorgement charm. The pumpkins, with a month to go before Hallowe'en, are the size of small boulders. 



Chapter 7: Mudbloods and Murmurs 46 

At lunchtime, they return to the Castle. — > Professor McGonagall meets them in the entrance hall and tells them their 
detentions. Ron will be polishing silver with — > Mr. Filch; Harry will be helping Professor Lockhart answer his fan 
mail. 

That evening, Harry goes to Professor Lockhart's office to serve his detention. Lockhart's office is decorated with 
pictures of himself, some even signed. As midnight nears, Harry, worn out with stuffing envelopes and ignoring 
Lockhart pontificating about fame, hears a low voice muttering violently. Harry jerks to attention to try and follow 
what it is being said. Lockhart says he cannot hear it, but notices that it is nearly midnight and dismisses Harry. 

Ron arrives at the dormitory half an hour later. He has had a rough time, having one final slug attack on a Special 
Award for Services to the School which required massive amounts of work to clean up. When told about the voice, 
Ron comments that it is odd Lockhart could not hear it, particularly since the door remained closed. Even if someone 
was invisible, they would have had to open the door to get in. 

Analysis 

There are several main points that are brought up in this chapter. The first of these is, of course, Draco's addition to 
the Slytherin Quidditch team, and the appearance of the team's new brooms, which are very probably related. We 
have been told that members of Slytherin house will use any advantage they can to achieve their goals, and it is quite 
likely that Draco, having decided that he must oppose Harry directly in Quidditch, had convinced his father to buy 
brooms for the team on condition that he was selected as Seeker. Likely his plan was to try and humiliate Harry by 
out-flying him. We don't yet know how well this will work. 

Draco's animosity towards those he perceives as less well-bred than himself is also now brought into sharp focus. We 
see him here insulting Hermione on the basis of her parentage, using terms that quite shock both Ron and Hagrid, 
even though Hermione does not understand the depth of the insult that has been thrown at her. 

Another point brought out is Ron's wand. We have already seen that it has become unpredictable, producing clouds 
of grey smoke and odd noises, but we now see that it no longer necessarily casts spells in the desired direction, even 
when it does work. 

We are led to believe that there is a certain amount of solidarity among the teachers, that one teacher will generally 
not criticize another. This will be stated explicitly in a later book, but so far has been only implied. Given that Hagrid 
does state that Lockhart's books might not be entirely truthful, one gathers that there is a lot of suspicion in the staff 
room that Lockhart is not anywhere near as good a wizard as he pretends. 

We are exposed to an extremely large dose of Lockhart's personality as Harry serves his detention. Lockhart here 
clearly believes that Harry is as driven by celebrity as he is, and is in need of tips as to how to handle fame. We see 
that Lockhart deeply enjoys being famous, to the extent that he does not even seem to mind having to send out tons 
of autographed pictures every week. Possibly, Lockhart's self-image is fueled by the belief that, being so widely 
known, he is universally loved, and he cannot conceive of anyone not being similarly in need of affirmation by the 
masses. 

This also is the first appearance of the mysterious voice within the walls. Something seems to be murderously angry 
in the castle, and Harry already is concerned that he will need to find out what it is, despite being worried that he 
seems to be the only one who can hear it. 



Chapter 7: Mudbloods and Murmurs 47 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

The Award for Special Services to the School is specifically singled out in later chapters, because it was the one 
given to — > Tom Riddle. Tom will play a large part in the end of this book, and it will turn out that he will play a 
significant part in the series as a whole. 

As we will see later in the book, the voice Harry heard in Lockhart's office was actually the — > Basilisk, the monster 
in the Chamber, which had been released and is now starting to roam through the school. Harry is the only one that 
can hear the voice because he is a — > Parselmouth; to everyone else, the sound is a low and undefined hissing noise. 
It is interesting that Harry perceives — > Parseltongue as English; this will prove to be a plot point much later in the 
series. 

Hermione learns that Harry can understand snakes, and from the effects of the Monster, and Harry's description of 
how it seems to be moving through the castle, she eventually determines that it is a Basilisk. Harry does manage to 
get this information from her even after she is Petrified herself. 

It is also important to note how Ron's wand backfired and hit him instead of Malfoy. This plays a big part later in the 
book when Harry, Ron, and Professor Lockhart delve into the Chamber of Secrets to rescue Ginny. 



Chapter 8: The Deathday Party 



Synopsis 

October is marked by continuous rainstorms; the lake rises, the flowerbeds turn into muddy streams, and — > Hagrid's 
pumpkins swell to the size of garden sheds. — > Oliver Wood, however, does not see any reason to let up on — > 
Quidditch practice, so it is no surprise that — > Harry is soaked and dripping mud one Saturday morning as he walks 
back to Gryffindor Tower after practice. On the way he meets — > Nearly Headless Nick, and they discuss their 
respective troubles: Nick is upset because his application to join the Headless Hunt has been rejected again, it seems 
that being nearly headless is not enough to qualify. Harry, meanwhile, is not looking forward to meeting Slytherin at 
Quidditch with the entire team mounted on new Nimbus 2001 brooms. As Harry is speaking, he is interrupted by 
Mrs. Norris, — > Filch's cat. Nick mentions that Filch is in a bad mood. Harry tries to make a quick escape but is 
thwarted by Filch's sudden appearance through a tapestry. Incensed at the water and mud dripping off Harry's 
Quidditch robes, Filch orders him to his office where he fills out a form recommending punishment for "befouling 
the castle." A loud noise interrupts him, and Filch charges off after — > Peeves in the hopes that he has finally done 
something unforgivable that will permanently ban him from Hogwarts. 

During Filch's absence, Harry notices an envelope on his desk. It is for a correspondence course called "Kwikspell," 
intended to improve a person's magical abilities. When Filch returns, he notices the envelope has been moved and, 
becoming embarrassed, lets Harry go without being punished. 

On exiting Filch's office, Harry meets Nearly Headless Nick again. Nick tells him that he arranged for Peeves to tip 
over a — > black and gold cabinet to distract Filch. Nick is relieved it worked and invites Harry to his Deathday Party 
to celebrate the five hundredth anniversary of his death, which occurred 31 October, 1492. He also invites — > Ron 
and — > Hermione, who are both keen to go. 

On Hallowe'en, they descend to the Dungeons where they are met by Nick and a panoply of ghosts, including — > 
Moaning Myrtle and Peeves. The gathering is rather uncomfortable for living people, and when Peeves insults 
Moaning Myrtle sending her off in tears, Harry, Ron, and Hermione decide it is a good time to exit. 



Chapter 8: The Deathday Party 48 

As they depart the Dungeon, Harry hears the same voice he heard in — > Professor Lockhart's office. He follows it 
upwards, with Hermione and Ron following, through the Entry Hall to the first floor. Sloshing through a puddle of 
water on the floor, he sees writing on the wall: "The Chamber Of Secrets Has Been Opened. Enemies Of the 
Heir, Beware." Mrs. Norris is hanging from a torch bracket, apparently dead. Before the Trio can react, students 
leaving the Hallowe'en Feast surround them. — > Malfoy's voice rings out: "Enemies of the Heir, beware! You'll be 
next, Mudbloods ! " 

Analysis 

One of the main things that the author excels at is called "the set-up and the pay-off", the ability to write something 
that begs a question, followed by, at some later point, the answer which illuminates much more than the question 
was asking. This chapter contains a relatively minor instance of this: we see that Filch has, on his desk, an envelope 
from a course that seems designed to teach basic magic, and we see that Filch is horribly embarrassed by this. Why? 

This is the first place that we get a concrete date for when the series is taking place within the books themselves. 
Unfortunately, this date conflicts with many of the days of the week reported in the story; specifically, for instance, 
in — > Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, we learn that Harry was orphaned on October 3 1 . If his second year 
at Hogwarts starts in September 1992, as here implied by the date given for Nearly Headless Nick's Deathday, then 
he must have turned 11 on 31 July 1991. As his birth date then would be 31 July 1980, he would have been orphaned 
on October 31, 1981. The book — > explicitly states that the next day was a Tuesday; but November 1, 1981 was a 
Sunday. Similarly, days of the week are given for Hallowe'en and for all three tasks in — > Harry Potter and the 
Goblet of Fire, but do not line up with the days of the week in 1994 and 1995. 

These failures of correspondence between the series calendar and our physical calendar are unimportant to the sweep 
of the story, so while they may be mentioned, they are provided more as a curiosity than as something for the scholar 
to concern himself with. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

Moaning Myrtle's departure from the party proves somewhat critical for reasons that are fully explained later in the 
story. Because Peeves had so upset her, Myrtle floods the hallway outside her bathroom. While we don't go into the 
bathroom this time to see this, in a later instance, when someone "throws a book through Myrtle's head," Harry and 
Ron will enter the bathroom and find all of the taps turned on and water all over the floor and the hall outside. As an 
aside, one of the popular slang terms for someone starting to cry is "turning on the waterworks;" it seems that Myrtle 
takes the expression literally. We will find out in the next chapter that Mrs. Norris is Petrified; if the hallway had not 
been flooded, the — > basilisk's glance would have killed Mrs. Norris. Because Mrs. Norris saw the Basilisk's 
reflection from the water, instead of looking at it directly, she was spared. Mrs. Norris will be the first to avoid direct 
sight of the Basilisk, and through luck or design all the other victims of the Basilisk this time will equally avoid 
direct eye contact, but we will also learn that earlier, the same had not been true. 

Harry has inadvertently discovered a secret about Filch: he is a — > squib. Squibs are born into wizarding families but 
have no magical abilities themselves. Filch is apparently attempting to overcome this "accident-of-birth" by taking a 
correspondence magic course. Harry's understanding, though, is incomplete at this point. While Harry now knows 
that Filch is trying to learn magic, he does not yet understand the import of this fact. Harry will learn the details in 
the next chapter. 

It is worth noting that although the cabinet that Peeves knocks over to distract Filch is insignificant to the overall 
storyline of this book, it reappears in — > Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, and in — > Harry Potter and the 
Half-Blood Prince it is a major plot device. In both of these appearances, it is an important fact that it is broken. 



Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall 49 

Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall 

Synopsis 

— > Filch appears and immediately accuses — > Harry of killing his cat. The situation is defused by the arrival of — > 
Professor Dumbledore and several other teachers. Dumbledore indicates that he needs a place to examine Mrs. 
Norris, and — > Professor Lockhart volunteers his office. Professor Dumbledore asks Filch, Harry, — > Ron, and — > 
Hermione to accompany him. Professors Lockhart, — > McGonagall, and — > Snape tag along. While Lockhart babbles 
about deaths he has prevented, Dumbledore examines Mrs. Norris, concluding she is not dead, merely Petrified, and 
that Harry could not have done it. Filch still believes that Harry was somehow involved because he knows Filch is a 
Squib. Harry states he does not even know what a Squib is. Snape suggests that while Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
were possibly just in the wrong place at the wrong time, it is suspicious that they were absent from the Hallowe'en 
feast. They explain that they were at the Deathday party but do not say why they did not go to the Feast afterwards. 
Harry does not want to reveal that he heard voices, but the excuse he does offer is rather flimsy. Snape suggests 
punishment for dishonesty, but is overruled by McGonagall and Dumbledore, to Filch's great displeasure. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione are dismissed, and Ron explains to Harry that a — > Squib is a non-magical person born to wizard 
parents. 

The possible opening of the Chamber causes a change in some students: — > Justin Finch-Fletchley avoids Harry in 
the halls, and Hermione is spending all her time in the library, among other things. Harry goes to speak with Ron in 
the library and finds that Hermione is upset because she cannot find any copies of Hogwarts: A History. In their next 
class, History of Magic with — > Professor Binns, she manages to persuade the old ghost to recount the legend of the 
Chamber of Secrets. 

Binns says that over a thousand years ago there was a falling out amongst the school's four founders, — > Godric 
Gryffindor, — > Salazar Slytherin, — > Rowena Ravenclaw, and — > Helga Hufflepuff. They argued over whether 
Muggle-borns and Muggles' descendants (half-bloods) should be admitted to Hogwarts. Slytherin alone believed 
only pure-bloods should be admitted, and he left the school when the others rejected his beliefs. The legend says he 
created a secret Chamber and hid a monster within it. Only Slytherin's true Heir can control the monster or open the 
Chamber. Although the Chamber has never been found, Binns is unsuccessful in convincing the class it does not 
exist. 

While passing between classes, — > little Colin Creevey mentions that someone said Harry could be the Heir; Harry 
realizes this could explain why Justin avoided him earlier. 

While walking in the hall, Harry, Ron, and Hermione realize they have reached the spot where Mrs. Norris was 
Petrified. They see a clutch of spiders running away from something. Ron is terrified of spiders, and, to change the 
subject, Harry mentions the water that is all over the floor. It is coming from the girls' bathroom that — > Moaning 
Myrtle inhabits. This bathroom is now in disrepair; it is also very wet, evidently because a moping Myrtle causes 
floods. She is less than communicative with them. — > Percy catches the three leaving the bathroom and docks five 
House points from Gryffindor. 

During a later discussion, Ron suggests that — > Malfoy would be the logical choice to be the Heir. Hermione says 
there is a way to find out. They could use — > Polyjuice Potion to impersonate someone else. However, she needs a 
copy of Moste Potente Potions from the library's restricted section to learn how to make it. For that, she needs a 
teacher's signature. "But what teacher," says Ron, "would be so thick?" 



Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall 50 

Analysis 

In this chapter we see the pay-off of the set-up that was made by the discovery of Argus Filch's Kwikspell course in 
the previous chapter. Filch admits that he is a Squib; Ron explains what a Squib is. In these two passages, we have 
learned why Filch feels the need to buy a beginner's magic course, and why he was not educated in the normal 
manner for Wizards. However, much more than this: we can now see why he is so very bitter. Year after year, he 
sees children that could have come from his family enter, get trained in the ways of magic that he can never know, 
and leave to careers he possibly once dreamed of, while he remains behind. Being a Squib is a horrible sort of half 
life, aware of the world of magic, but despite being surrounded by it, not being a part of it. 

We are also granted a bit more insight into the nature of Gilderoy Lockhart. As we step into his office, all of the 
pictures of him whisk themselves out of their frames and into hiding; some of them, overcome by curiosity, reappear 
later, and Harry notes that some of them are wearing hairnets. Lockhart himself, instead of helping with the 
investigation, babbles on about deaths he has supposedly prevented. When Mrs. Norris is found to be merely 
petrified, Lockhart suggests that he could whip up a restorative potion in short order, irritating Snape, who of course, 
as Potions master, would expect that job to be his. 

This last point also highlights the dislike that Snape has for Lockhart. By this stage, most of the teachers have 
dismissed Lockhart as a fraud, and no doubt Snape shares that opinion. We suspect that Professor Dumbledore is 
aware of this as well, and has only hired him as Lockhart was the only applicant for the post (according to — > 
Hagrid). We should note that Snape was apparently irritated in particular by Harry's fame in the previous book; it 
was the fact that Harry was famous that Snape had dwelt on in — > Harry's first Potions lesson. Harry does not 
actively seek the spotlight, but Lockhart does, to the point that almost everything he does is aimed at getting himself 
more attention. This can only serve to increase Snape's dislike of Lockhart, a dislike that is heightened still more by 
Lockhart's self-serving attempt to take over some of Snape's duties. 

The core of the plot line of this story is here revealed. While Binns states that there can be no Chamber of Secrets, 
that multiple headmasters have looked for it for years and never found even a broom-closet of secrets, still it is 
evident to the reader, as it is to the students, that the Chamber does exist and does have some monster in it. There is 
no other possible explanation for the petrification of Mrs. Norris. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Since Mrs. Norris is just a cat (not an Animagus), why would she have been selected as the first victim? 

Greater Picture 

While Harry, Hermione and Ron are examining the area where Mrs. Norris's body was found, they notice some 
strangely-behaving spiders. Ron admits that he has a fear of spiders, which is confirmed later in this book, and also 
in the next two books: by his — > Boggart in — > Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, and his behavior during — > 
Mad-Eye Moody's — > Unforgivable Curse demonstration in — > Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. The peculiar 
behavior of the spiders in this scene sets the stage for events later on by giving a clue about the monster Slytherin 
concealed within the Chamber. 

One must wonder about Professor Binns' vehement denial of the existence of the Chamber of Secrets. We will find 
out that the Chamber had been opened before, some fifty years previously, and the headmaster of the day, — > 
Professor Dippet, had considered closing the school as a result of that. While it is possible that occurrence had been 
before Professor Binns joined the school, that seems unlikely; Binns' apparent refusal to teach anything later than 
about the nineteenth century argues for his having been a teacher for many more years than a mere fifty. 



Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall 5 1 

It is noted in this chapter that Percy penalizes Harry and Ron house points; this could be a plot hole since — > prefects, 
as we find out in later books, are not given this power. It is possible, however, that Percy has taken on an 
over-inflated sense of his own importance, and when that importance is questioned, as Ron does here, Percy reacts 
by saying he's docking House points, when in fact he can do no such thing. The author said in an interview that she 
believes Percy is more likely to be right than Ron, who said in — > Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix that 
prefects could not dock House points; she later reinforced this statement on her official web site . Against this, 
however, we must mention that Draco Malfoy, then a prefect, agreed that Prefects could not dock House points. One 
can be sure that if Draco were able to dock House points from Gryffindors, he would, and in fact as a member of the 
Inquisitorial Squad he was allowed to, and did. In this particular case, it makes more sense in the story as a whole to 
have Percy be overstepping his boundaries through over-officiousness, a very Percy-like thing to do, than to have 
Draco later refrain from abusing a power he has been given. 

References 

[1] http://www.jkrowling.com/textonly/en/faq_view.cfm?id=40 



Chapter 10: The Rogue Bludger 



Synopsis 

After the rather disastrous episode with the — > Pixies, — > Professor Lockhart has changed the Defense Against the 
Dark Arts course; now it is mostly Lockhart re-enacting scenes from his books with the unwilling assistance of — > 
Harry. Today Harry is being a werewolf, playing along because he wants to stay on Lockhart's good side. At the end 
of class, — > Hermione asks him to sign a note for a book that will help her understand something in one of his works; 
he signs it without bothering to see what the book is, then offers to provide Harry advice on being a — > Quidditch 
Seeker. At the school library, — > Madam Pince accepts the note, though with some misgivings, and gets a copy of 
Moste Potente Potions for Hermione. 

Shortly thereafter, Hermione, Harry, and — > Ron are in — > Moaning Myrtle's bathroom; this is one place they are 
unlikely to be disturbed. Looking over the ingredients and methods for the Polyjuice Potion, they find that they need 
ingredients (— > Boomslang skin and Bicorn horn) not stocked in the student supplies cupboard. The potion will take 
about a month to make. Hermione, surprisingly, convinces Harry and Ron that they have to take some chances in 
order to do this. 

Next day is Quidditch against Slytherin. As soon as they get into the air, a Bludger targets Harry. Despite — > Fred 
and George's best efforts, the Bludger seems determined to knock Harry off his broom; as the rest of the team is 
getting slaughtered by the remaining Bludger and the Slytherin Beaters, Harry tells Fred and George to let him deal 
with the Bludger on his own. Eventually, Harry spots the Snitch, hovering over — > Malfoy's head, but while lining up 
to grab it, he is hit by the Bludger. It breaks his arm, but he manages to catch the Snitch with the other hand and land 
on the ground intact. Regaining consciousness, he is dismayed to see Lockhart standing over him. Lockhart promptly 
uses a spell to "mend" Harry's broken arm but it instead removes all the bones from his arm and hand. 

In the hospital wing, — > Madam Pomfrey is furious — she can easily fix broken bones, but regrowing them will be 
an overnight job, and a painful one at that. Ron helps Harry into pyjamas. The Gryffindor team arrives to celebrate 
the win over Slytherin but are promptly thrown out by Madam Pomfrey. 

Later that night, Harry is awakened by — > Dobby sponging his forehead. Dobby admits that he closed the barrier at 
— > Kings Cross station to prevent Harry from returning to school and that he enchanted the Bludger in hopes it would 
injure Harry enough to send him home where he would be safe. He tells Harry that a House-elf can only be freed if 
his Master gives him clothing, which is why he wears an old pillowcase. He also mentions that the Chamber of 



Chapter 10: The Rogue Bludger 52 

Secrets has been opened once before. Realizing he was not meant to mention that, he punishes himself by smashing 
Harry's water jug over his own head. Hearing a noise, he vanishes. — > Professor Dumbledore and — > Professor 
McGonagall bring in a Petrified — > Colin Creevey, who was apparently on his way to visit Harry, carrying his 
camera and a bunch of grapes. Colin's camera is completely melted inside; Dumbledore says that this proves that the 
Chamber is open again, but the main question is not who, but how? 

Analysis 

Lockhart's apparent ineptness with magic is shown in significantly more detail. Now, instead of teaching charms for 
self-defence, Lockhart has chosen to re-enact scenes from his books, seemingly in order to avoid something like the 
Cornish Pixies incident. And, despite his claim that he is an expert in healing magic, his attempt to heal Harry only 
results in a worse injury. One must wonder why Hermione, normally so logical, again rejects the possibility of 
Lockhart being incompetent despite this proof. It is perhaps telling that at the close of the previous chapter, Ron 
asks, he thinks rhetorically, which teacher would be so thick as to give second-year students permission to take a 
book out of the Restricted section of the library, and at the beginning of this chapter, we see that Hermione is 
assisting in getting a signature from Lockhart. Could she be starting to see, despite her infatuation, that he is perhaps 
not quite as brilliant as he claims? 

Dobby is clearly still trying to convince Harry to leave Hogwarts; he quite clearly knows that the Chamber has been 
opened in relatively recent memory and that something happened then that could indicate that Harry's life is in peril. 
His attempts to chase Harry away, or prevent his traveling to Hogwarts, are almost laughable. We have seen four 
attempts so far. Dobby first tried intercepting all of Harry's mail to try and convince him that none of his Hogwarts 
friends cared about him, so that he would choose to stay home instead. When that failed, he threatened to wreck a 
dessert in the Dursley kitchen unless Harry promised to stay away from Hogwarts. Harry's refusal to promise 
resulted in the dessert being wrecked. Dobby could not have predicted the side effects of that; the owl from the 
Ministry of Magic, and — > Uncle Vernon's decision to lock Harry into his room were not things that Dobby would 
have expected to happen. Dobby's next attempt, blocking the barrier to the platform, failed when Harry and Ron used 
the flying car to get to Hogwarts, and this last attempt, to injure Harry badly enough to send him home, seems 
extremely poorly thought out. Does Dobby actually believe that Muggle medical care is better than what Harry can 
receive at Hogwarts? Or does he believe that Uncle Vernon and — > Aunt Petunia would allow magical healing to 
happen in their house? Dobby seems to be blind to the idea that Harry's house is not a home for him, and that even 
with the threat that Dobby is unable to enunciate, Hogwarts is a more welcoming place than — > Privet Drive. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

After stating that the — > Chamber of Secrets has been reopened, Dumbledore comments that the question should not 
be who opened it, but how it was opened. This implies that Dumbledore does not follow the commonly-held belief 
that — > Hagrid opened it before, and — > Tom Riddle had caught him in the act and stopped it. If Dumbledore suspects 
that Riddle had opened the Chamber fifty years ago and believes that he has reopened it now, Dumbledore may have 
already formulated theories about — > horcruxes. Until the revelation of the diary, however, any such theory would be 
extremely tentative; Dumbledore no doubt also remembers the year before when the shade of Voldemort was riding 
— > Professor Quirrell, and may be wondering if Voldemort might have found another mount, despite rumours placing 
him in Albania. 

It seems that Dobby is more aware of the nature of the weapon that — > Lucius has brought into the school than 
Lucius himself is. We will find out in a later book that Hogwarts employs several hundred House Elves, and it is 
extremely likely that the House Elf society communicates amongst themselves. So it is quite likely that Dobby 
knows, if not the true nature of what the Chamber of Secrets conceals, at the very least that Lucius has provided the 



Chapter 10: The Rogue Bludger 53 

means to reopen the Chamber, and the fact that the chamber had been opened fifty years previous and that a student 
had then died. It is almost certainly fear for Harry's life that is causing Dobby to carry out these ineffective, almost 
childlike attempts to get Harry to return "home" to Privet Drive. 

Having revealed that he is, in fact, trying to get Harry back home, and having been so fiercely rebuffed, Dobby will 
not attempt again. Dobby likely is now aware that, if anything occurs which appears to be trying to send Harry home, 
Harry will believe that it is Dobby up to his old tricks, and so further attempts would be ineffective. 



Chapter 11: The Dueling Club 



Synopsis 

By morning, — > Harry's arm is better and he is discharged from the hospital wing after breakfast. He finds — > Ron 
and — > Hermione in — > Moaning Myrtle's washroom, already making the — > Polyjuice Potion. Harry tells them about 
— > Dobby's visit; Ron observes that if Dobby does not stop trying to help Harry, he is likely to kill him. 

The news about — > Colin Creevey's Petrification has spread, and — > Ginny, who is in Colin's class, is distraught; also, 
there is a brisk business in Talismans and other supposedly magical protective objects. — > Neville buys a lot before 
being reminded that he is a — > Pureblood, but he says "they went for — > Filch first," and believes he may be a target 
due to his weak magical ability. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sign up to stay at the school over Christmas after hearing that — > Malfoy is doing the 
same. But the Polyjuice potion is nowhere near ready, and they will need to raid — > Professor Snape's private stores 
for some ingredients. Surprisingly, Hermione volunteers to steal the ingredients if Harry or Ron can create a 
diversion. During the next Potions class, Harry tosses a firecracker into — > Goyle's Swelling Solution. The resulting 
splashed potion requires Snape to administer Deflating Draughts to everyone. While he is occupied, Hermione 
sneaks into Snape's office and retrieves — > Boomslang skin and Bicorn horn. After class has ended, Hermione adds 
the new ingredients to the potion, saying it will be ready in a fortnight. 

A week later, Harry, Ron, and Hermione see a notice about a Dueling Club being started. Harry reckons it will be 
useful, so at 8:00 p.m. all three are in the Great Hall, only to find out that it is being taught by none other than — > 
Professor Lockhart, with Professor Snape as his assistant. In the first demonstration, Professor Snape throws 
Professor Lockhart across the room with an — > Expelliarmus jinx. Rather than try a second time, Lockhart breaks the 
students into pairs with Snape's assistance; Harry is paired with Malfoy, Ron with — > Seamus, and Hermione with — > 
Miss Bullstrode. Lockhart counts down and mayhem ensues: Malfoy jinxes Harry before the start signal, but Harry 
retaliates; Ron's wand misfires, doing something horrible to Seamus. Hermione and Millicent Bullstrode have 
dropped their wands and are wrestling — Millicent has Hermione in a headlock, and Harry has to break her out of it, a 
tough job considering Millicent is bigger than he is. Lockhart suggests they have one pair of students on stage to 
demonstrate, and suggests Neville and — > Justin Finch-Fletchley; Snape overrules him and suggests Harry and 
Malfoy. At the count, Malfoy conjures a snake that slides down the stage towards Harry. Lockhart attempts to 
eliminate it, but merely sends it flying ten feet into the air. When it lands, it seems to be preparing to attack Justin; 
Harry yells at the snake to leave Justin alone. Surprisingly the snake obeys. Justin makes a comment to Harry and 
leaves the Great Hall at a near run as Snape destroys the snake. Ron drags Harry out of the room exclaiming, "I 
didn't know you were a — > Parselmouth!" Harry does not know what that is, and Ron explains it is someone who can 
talk to snakes. Hermione adds that it is a very rare ability, and it is what — > Salazar Slytherin was famous for. Now 
Harry has to wonder — could he be the Heir of Slytherin? 

Harry wants to explain to Justin exactly what happened, but next day's — > Herbology class is canceled due to snow. 
At Hermione's urging, Harry goes to the library to find Justin and overhears Hufflepuffs talking about why he has 
gone into hiding. Justin fears Harry is the Heir of Slytherin and would Petrify him next because he is a Muggle-born. 



Chapter 1 1 : The Dueling Club 54 

Harry tries to explain what happened, but — > Ernie, the group's apparent leader, says that all he saw was Harry 
speaking Parseltongue and chasing the snake towards Justin. Furious, Harry stalks out and runs straight into — > 
Hagrid, who is on his way to see the Headmaster about something that is killing his roosters. Leaving Hagrid, Harry 
trips over a Petrified Justin Finch-Fletchley and finds himself staring at — > Nearly Headless Nick, now black and 
smoky rather than his usual transparent white, and also apparently Petrified. Harry also notices spiders running away 
from the bodies. 

While Harry is trying to figure out what to do, — > Peeves discovers him and determines that the most fun thing to do 
is summon everyone. — > Professor McGonagall arrives and sends everyone back to class. She assigns Ernie 
Macmillan to take Nick to the Hospital Wing while — > Professor Flitwick and — > Professor Sinistra take Justin. 
Professor McGonagall then leads Harry through a door guarded by a gargoyle (password: Sherbet Lemon), up a 
revolving spiral stone staircase and to an oaken door. Harry knows he has been brought to see — > Professor 
Dumbledore. 

Analysis 

Hermione's ongoing unbending is shown here in her willingness to raid Snape's stores for the ingredients they need 
for the Polyjuice potion. Her willingness to break the rules should not be much of a surprise to the reader, who has 
been watching her get steadily less stiff through this and the previous book; however, it is quite a shock to Ron, who 
will continue to believe that Hermione is rule-bound, despite evidence to the contrary, well into Harry Potter and the 
Goblet of Fire. 

The Dueling Club shows us Gilderoy Lockhart's continuing ineptness, as he is unable to block a simple spell from 
Snape, stop the student duels, or eliminate the snake that Draco had produced. By now, we should be starting to 
wonder whether Gilderoy is a wizard at all, or merely a very good self-promoter. It is curious that Hermione is still 
so apparently taken with him. Snape, of course, sees through Lockhart; Ron observes that if Snape had looked at him 
like he was looking at Lockhart, Ron would have run for cover. 

In the dueling club, we also learn that Harry can talk to snakes, and that this is a very rare achievement, linked only 
to Salazar Slytherin and his descendants. Given that the school is now fearing the ongoing depredations of "the Heir 
of Slytherin", this is a major concern, of course; proof of the connection between Salazar Slytherin and Harry could 
not be any plainer, and Harry, who is unsure of his ancestry, cannot disprove even to himself that he could be the 
Heir. The only mitigating factor that we, as readers, have is the knowledge that Harry himself was not present when 
the petrifications happened. Harry knows this as well, but cannot prove it in the two cases preceding the Dueling 
Club, or the one following. (The final one, as we will see, largely proves his innocence; but that does not occur for 
several months yet.) 

This whole episode throws Harry into a great deal of confusion. The Sorting Hat wanted to put him into Slytherin 
house; he remembers quite plainly that the only reason it didn't was that he didn't want to be there. Obviously, the 
Hat had recognized the link to Slytherin that is now made manifest by Harry's — > Parseltongue ability. Yet Harry has 
come to enjoy being a Gryffindor; is he there under false pretenses? This uncertainty, to a greater or lesser extent, 
preys on Harry for the remainder of the book. 



Chapter 1 1 : The Dueling Club 55 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

Colin Creevey is the first Petrification of a student. The fact that he is in Ginny's class is apparently sufficient to 
cause her concern; in fact, her concern is caused by the slowly-dawning realization that she may be the one 
responsible for it, as it happened during a time that she cannot remember what she was doing. 

The wrestling match between Hermione and Millicent Bullstrode is useful to our plot, as it is here that Hermione 
collects a hair that will later be used as part of Hermione's dose of Polyjuice Potion. This will, however, turn out to 
be something of a disaster as the hair in question does not come from Millicent herself. 

We will learn in — > Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows that Harry's ability with Parseltongue is in fact due to a 
link with Slytherin; it will be a sideways link, though, as it is related to the piece of — > Voldemort's soul that adhered 
to Harry and remains with him. The author has confirmed in a later interview that Harry's parseltongue ability 
vanished with that soul shard, and he has not missed it since. 

Dumbledore later quiets Harry's doubts by showing him that he has received the — > Sword of Gryffindor from the — > 
Sorting Hat. "Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out of the Hat, Harry." While Dumbledore likely already 
knows about the soul shard, it is not something that he believes Harry is ready to hear about yet. It is only at the end 
of — > Harry's fifth year that Dumbledore finally tells Harry of the — > prophecy, which says either he or Voldemort 
must die. Dumbledore already understands that Harry will have to die in order to destroy the soul shard he carries; he 
believes, probably correctly, at the age of twelve Harry is too young to carry that weight of destiny. 

Chapter 12: The Polyjuice Potion 

Synopsis 

Leaving — > Harry in the office, — > Professor McGonagall departs. Looking around, Harry sees intricate small 
mechanisms on the many tables, portraits of sleeping past Headmasters and Headmistresses on the walls, and the — > 
Sorting Hat on a shelf behind a desk. Seeing nobody around, Harry tries on the Hat, asking it if it still believes he 
should be in Slytherin. The Hat says Harry would have been great there. Replacing it on the shelf, Harry tells it that 
it is wrong. A slight noise attracts Harry's attention, and he sees an ill-looking bird sitting on a perch burst into 
flames. As it crumbles into ashes, — > Professor Dumbledore enters. He seem unperturbed about the bird catching fire. 
He explains, "— > Fawkes is a — > Phoenix, Harry. Phoenixes burst into flames when it is time for them to die and are 
reborn from the ashes." Lifting a chick from the ashes and placing it back on the perch, Dumbledore tells Harry that 
Phoenixes are extremely beautiful, except on a burning day. Also, "they can carry extremely heavy loads, their tears 
have healing powers, and they make extremely faithful pets." 

Dumbledore is about to ask Harry something when he is interrupted by — > Hagrid, who bursts into the office, loudly 
proclaiming Harry's innocence. Dumbledore assures Hagrid that he does not suspect Harry of anything. Abashed, 
Hagrid leaves the office. 

Dumbledore asks Harry if there is anything he would like to tell him. Harry silently recalls Ron's comment that 
hearing voices no one else can, even in the Wizarding world, is a bad thing, so he decides to say nothing to 
Dumbledore about it. Dumbledore dismisses him, and he returns to his dorm. 

Nearly everyone in the school is now convinced that Harry is the Heir; — > Fred and George, however, joke about it, 
which Harry appreciates, as it makes it clear they do not believe it. — > Ginny, however, seems quite distraught. 

The term ends, and there are a few stayovers for Christmas, including — > Draco Malfoy, and his cronies — > Crabbe 
and — > Goyle. On Christmas day, — > Hermione barges into the boys' dormitory, waking them up and letting them 



Chapter 12: The Polyjuice Potion 56 

know the — > Polyjuice Potion is ready. Harry receives Christmas presents from the Weasleys, while the — > Dursleys 
have sent him a toothpick. After Christmas dinner, Hermione gives Harry and Ron a pair of small cakes loaded with 
Sleeping Potion. They place them where they know Crabbe and Goyle will find them after stuffing themselves at 
dinner and leaving the Great Hall. Spying the cakes, Crabbe and Goyle promptly eat them; Ron and Harry drag the 
unconscious pair into a closet, gather a few hairs, and take their shoes. They head off to — > Moaning Myrtle's 
washroom where Hermione awaits with the potion. 

Hermione has a hair from — > Millicent Bullstrode's robes, acquired during the Dueling Club debacle. After each adds 
a hair to their potion and drinks it, Ron and Harry painfully transform into Crabbe and Goyle's likenesses. Hermione, 
as did Ron, quickly retreated to a cubicle as the potion took effect. A few moments later Hermione tells Harry and 
Ron to go without her — something seems amiss, but she does not elaborate. 

After much searching, Ron and Harry finally find the Slytherin Common room, although they run into — > Percy, who 
threatens detention for being in the halls after hours. They are rescued by Malfoy, who demands to know where they 
have been and leads them into the Common room. He begins discussing the Chamber of Secrets and says the 
Chamber was opened once before. A girl died then, killed by the Monster, and that the person who released it is 
likely still in — > Azkaban. Although he does not know who the Heir is, he wishes it was himself. He says his father 
has told him not to become involved in the matter, however. 

As the potion starts wearing off, Harry and Ron rush back to Moaning Myrtle's washroom, politely leaving Crabbe 
and Goyle's shoes outside the closet they are still stashed in. They find Moaning Myrtle is happier than they have 
ever seen her, laughing wildly at Hermione. Apparently, the hair Hermione plucked off Millicent Bullstrode's robes 
was not Millicent's at all, but her cat's. Hermione now has a furry face, pointed ears, yellow eyes with slit pupils, and 
a bushy tail. As Polyjuice Potion is not intended for species transformations, it will not wear off on its own. 

Analysis 

Our introduction to Dumbledore's office here gives us additional insight into the nature of the Headmaster. At this 
point, we should be able to see that the — > Put-Outer, which we saw — > in the first chapter of the first book, is the 
same sort of magical / mechanical device which fills Dumbledore's office. We will gather that Dumbledore actually 
creates these things, rather than simply collecting and using them. 

Once again, the Sorting Hat states that Harry would be great in Slytherin House. Harry, by this time, has started 
seeing indications that there is a link between him and Slytherin, notably Harry's ability to speak — > Parseltongue. 
This has left him unsure of whether he is, in fact, the Heir of Slytherin, as he has no way to trace his ancestry at this 
point. Despite his vehement denial of the Hat's belief, Harry, already troubled at the possibility, must be even more 
upset at the Hat's insistence on this link. 

The emphasis that Dumbledore places on the abilities of the Phoenix seems a little more than we would expect; it is 
likely that this is a bit of foreshadowing. We are told of extreme loyalty, ability to lift heavy weights, and that its 
tears have healing powers; how could these abilities be of assistance to Harry? 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Should Harry have told Dumbledore about hearing voices? What would Dumbledore have done? 

Greater Picture 

It is in this chapter that Harry first meets Fawkes, Professor Dumbledore's phoenix. Fawkes plays an important part 
later in the year, saving Harry from dying twice (once by blinding the — > Basilisk, the other one by curing him from 
the Basilisk venom). Additionally, his other abilities are necessary in the end of this book, because it is his loyalty 



Chapter 12: The Polyjuice Potion 57 

that will summon him to Harry's defence, and his ability to lift heavy weights will be what brings Harry and his 
co-adventurers back to the surface after the battle is complete. Fawkes will prove helpful both to Harry and to 
Dumbledore throughout the series. 

In — > Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Harry learns that the phoenix feather core of his holly wand comes from 
Fawkes, as does the core of Voldemort's yew wand. 

Draco's admission that he does not know who the Heir of Slytherin is, and that his father hasn't told him anything 
except to stay out of it, is somewhat telling. Knowing what the Diary actually is, we can see that the Heir of 
Slytherin is, as Dumbledore has suggested, the same person as it was last time, — > Tom Riddle. However, the fact 
that Lucius has given Draco no instructions except to stay clear, again indicates that Lucius does not have a clear 
idea of what he has unleashed. 

Ginny's being distraught at the Twins' fooling around is worthy of mention. We believe that Ginny has a crush on 
Harry, and we presume that this alone is enough to leave Ginny upset; the twins seem to be making fun of Harry, and 
we believe that Ginny is upset at this, despite Harry's appreciation of the fact that at least two people find the 
association of him with Slytherin to be laughable. In fact, though, a large part of Ginny's dismay is likely due to her 
beginning to wonder if she is acting as the Heir. Clearly, by this time, she has determined that the times when these 
things happen are times that she cannot remember what she has been doing, and, as the horcrux of Tom Riddle tells 
us later, is beginning to fear that she is losing her mind. 

The portraits of the sleeping headmasters and headmistresses will play a part starting from — > Harry Potter and the 
Order of the Phoenix. The reader must be a bit curious, actually, as to why all these portraits are so sleepy when the 
portraits in the school proper are talkative and interact with the students. It will turn out that their apparent sleepiness 
is a form of concealment. 

Chapter 13: The Very Secret Diary 

Synopsis 

Returning to Gryffindor tower after visiting — > Hermione in the Hospital Wing, — > Harry and — > Ron hear an 
outburst from — > Filch and cautiously investigate. A large puddle of water has covered the floor near Filch's usual 
post, the hallway where Mrs. Norris was petrified. The water is coming from — > Moaning Myrtle's washroom. When 
Harry and Ron enter the washroom, they find she is even more distraught than usual. Someone threw a book at her 
while she was in her favorite U-bend pipe. In her watery reaction, she washed the book from the cubicle and onto the 
floor. Harry finds it is a diary, dated fifty years previously, belonging to one T. M. Riddle, but the pages are blank. 
From his detention, Ron remembers that a T. M. Riddle received an award for Special Services to the School fifty 
years ago. He especially remembers having to polish it about fifty times because of slug slime. 

In early February, Hermione, now fur-free and tailless, leaves the Hospital Wing. Harry tells her about Riddle's 
diary. She notices a correlation between the diary and the Chamber of Secrets: the — > Chamber was last opened fifty 
years ago. Thinking the diary may contain information about the Chamber, she attempts several revealing spells on 
it, but it remains stubbornly blank. Harry visits the Trophy Room to find some information about Riddle, but apart 
from his award, and his name on the list of Head Boys, there is no mention of what he did or who he is. Harry keeps 
the diary, hoping to learn about Riddle. 

The mood at school is lighter; the attacks have ceased for now and spring is coming. The only cloud on the horizon 
is — > Professor Lockhart claiming credit for halting the attacks. Lockhart proposes a little "morale-booster" for 
Valentine's Day, which turns out to be a squad of dwarves dressed as Cupids running around the school delivering 
live Valentines. One corners Harry to deliver a Valentine (most likely from — > Ginny). In the resulting fracas, 
Harry's bag is ripped, and ink from a broken bottle spills over everything. — > Malfoy is there, grabs the diary, and 



Chapter 13: The Very Secret Diary 58 

starts waving it around. Ginny seems terrified, and Harry reclaims the diary using the — > disarming jinx. Harry 
notices that the diary does not have any ink stains. He tries to point this out to Ron, but Ron is occupied with his 
recalcitrant wand and ignores him. 

That night, Harry discovers that if he writes in the diary, it responds with — > Tom Riddle's written words. When 
Harry asks about the Chamber of Secrets, the diary shows him the events of 13 June, fifty years back. Tom Riddle 
asks then-headmaster, — > Professor Dippet, if he can remain at Hogwarts for the summer, rather than return to his 
orphanage "home." Professor Dippet says because the Chamber of Secrets has been opened, that is impossible, and 
the school may have to close permanently. Riddle is then seen in the dungeons, secretly watching another student 
sneak in to care for an unknown large creature. It is — > Hagrid, then a third-year student. Tom confronts Hagrid and 
accuses him of releasing the Monster from the Chamber. As the creature scuttles away, Harry is suddenly ejected 
from the memory. He then tells Ron what he saw and that it was Hagrid who supposedly opened the Chamber of 
Secrets fifty years ago. 

Analysis 

It is mentioned here that Filch's usual post is a chair under the writing on the wall where Mrs. Norris was found. 
Thus, Mrs. Norris was found very close to Moaning Myrtle's washroom. While Harry and Ron never consciously 
make this connection, it may help Harry solve the riddle of the entrance to the Chamber later in the story. This also, 
incidentally, explains where the water came from that was on the floor of the hallway when Mrs. Norris was found. 
We had already seen that — > Peeves' insults had chased Myrtle back to her washroom; her distraught turning on of all 
the water in the washroom on that occasion, and the resulting flood in the hall, will likely prove important to the 
story. 

The "mood lightener" at the school shows exactly how little understanding Lockhart has of how real people think. It 
does allow us to see how the other teachers feel about Lockhart. Additionally, it causes Harry to ask a question about 
the diary (why didn't it get ink-stained?), and as a result he learns how to communicate with it. 

The episode with the diary will re-confirm that the Chamber had been opened fifty years before, and a girl had died 
at that time. Draco Malfoy had told us this earlier, and that he did not know who had been responsible then. 
Evidence later in the series will indicate that — > Lucius Malfoy, Draco's father had attended Hogwarts some twenty 
years before Harry, so he could not have been there when the Chamber had been opened previously; it is possible 
that Lucius does not actually know who the Heir is, as he told Draco, though by now he may be having some 
suspicions. 

This will be the first, but by no means the last, of Harry's experiences in other people's memories. Note that Harry is 
initially confused that Dippet does not react to him; this is the key indicator that he is in someone else's memories, 
which are of course unchanging. One possibly confusing issue is that if we are in Tom's memory, as stated, how can 
we see what Dippet is doing before Tom arrives? This is never completely explained. The author has said that when 
you are in someone else's memory, what you see is what happened, not what they perceived. It is possible that there 
is a range of effectiveness of the charm that retrieves the memory, such that anything happening within 30 feet 
(10M) or so of the owner of the memory can be retrieved. 



Chapter 13: The Very Secret Diary 59 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

For several reasons, this is a pivotal chapter in the book. 

An important part of the whole plot of the Harry Potter series is shown here: this is Harry's first contact with Tom 
Riddle's diary, which we learn in — > Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was the first — > Horcrux found of six 
believed made by — > Voldemort (whose original name was Tom Marvolo Riddle). We will learn that it is this soul 
shard of Tom's that is opening the Chamber, and he is doing it by controlling Ginny. It is because Ginny has finally 
connected the diary with the strangeness that is going on that she attempts to get rid of it by flushing it down the 
toilet in Moaning Myrtle's washroom, thus arousing Myrtle's ire and attracting Harry and Ron's attention. The 
episode with Draco Malfoy, where he is waving the diary around, particularly disturbs Ginny because she recognizes 
the diary and thought she had gotten rid of it, and now was deathly afraid that Harry might learn how to 
communicate with it, and through it learn the secrets that she had entrusted to it. We are led to believe, however, that 
her mortification is because she is the originator of the Valentine greeting being delivered to Harry. 

It is because Ginny no longer has the diary, and thus is no longer being controlled by it, that the attacks cease. Ginny 
will eventually retrieve the diary, and the attacks will immediately start up again, though nobody will make the 
connection between the two events. 

This is also where Harry learns a fundamental piece of the story, although it is incomplete: apparently, Hagrid had 
something to do with the opening of the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago. However, we will shortly learn that the 
pet Tom Riddle saw him with was an — > Acromantula, a large spider which is capable of speech. While Hagrid and 
the Acromantula will prove to be totally unconnected with the Chamber, it will be this Acromantula, — > Aragog, who 
will give Harry a clue he needs to find the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets. 

While the memory that Tom shows Harry is accurate, it is incomplete and is slanted to imply Tom is innocent and 
Hagrid is the one who opened the Chamber. Harry, like the school of Tom Riddle's day, is taken in by this. Of 
course, it was Tom, who was the only remaining heir of Slytherin at that time, and who had been exploring the 
school extensively, who had found and opened the Chamber, and who was controlling the Monster within it. It is 
because of Tom's exposure of Hagrid, and his carefully not releasing the Monster again after Hagrid's expulsion, that 
the Headmaster of the day, Dippet, and the rest of the school (with the possible exception of — > Professor 
Dumbledore), believed he had correctly identified the one who was opening the Chamber. It is for this that Tom was 
given the Special Services award. 

As a side note, we should mention that memories of this nature can be edited; we will see an instance of that in — > 
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince that — > Professor Slughorn has edited his memories before giving them to — > 
Professor Dumbledore. The editing in that case was done rather clumsily. Unlike Slughorn, Riddle does not try to 
replace segments of memory which he wants to keep hidden; instead he simply jumps over them. 

It is actually in this book, looking back on it from the end of the series, that we first see the habit of Dumbledore to 
hold his cards extremely close to his vest. Dumbledore, we are told, had his suspicions about Riddle from the 
beginning, suspicions that were held by none of the other staff. Dumbledore seems to have suspected that Riddle had 
not been entirely truthful in his exposure of Hagrid as the one who was opening the Chamber. Dumbledore has 
clearly retained this suspicion through the intervening fifty years, and believes that it is Riddle who is again opening 
the Chamber, but as seen in — > an earlier chapter, only wonders how he is doing it. 



Chapter 14: Cornelius Fudge 60 



Chapter 14: Cornelius Fudge 



Synopsis 

— > Harry, — > Ron, and — > Hermione discuss this revelation endlessly — none want to believe that — > Hagrid would 
have anything to do with a monster. And yet, they know he was expelled from Hogwarts and likes large and scary 
creatures, like "Fluffy," the giant three-headed dog that guarded the — > Philosopher's Stone the previous year. The 
attacks must have stopped after — > Tom Riddle turned in Hagrid. Otherwise, Tom would not have received the 
Special Services award. They decided to do nothing unless there are more attacks. The school seems to be returning 
to normal, and the — > Mandrake plants are maturing and almost ready be used to treat those who have been Petrified. 

Starting in their third year, Hogwarts students can attend elective courses, so over Easter Break, the second-years are 
to select their third-year classes. Everyone wants advice on what to take, except Hermione, who eventually decides 
to take everything. Harry asks — > Percy, who pompously tells him to stay with his strengths. Feeling he has no 
strengths except — > Quidditch, Harry decides to take the same courses as Ron so they can work together. 

— > Oliver Wood is mercilessly practicing the Quidditch team. The game against — > Hufflepuff House is coming up, 
and they have the best chance in years to win the trophy. Returning from practice, Harry discovers his dorm has been 
ransacked, apparently by someone searching for something. While reorganizing his things, Harry discovers Riddle's 
diary is gone. Harry surmises that a — > Gryffindor must have taken it; nobody else knows the password to the tower. 

The next day, as Harry heads to the Quidditch pitch for the match against Hufflepuff, he hears the voice again. Ron 
and Hermione, who are with him, hear nothing, but something suddenly occurs to Hermione. With her usual cryptic 
comments, she heads to the library. Ron and Harry go to the Pitch, but just before the game starts, — > Professor 
McGonagall announces it has been canceled and orders everyone to their House Common rooms. She singles out 
Harry and Ron and has them follow her to the infirmary. There has been a double attack: a — > Ravenclaw girl and 
Hermione have been petrified. Both were found near the library, and Hermione was clutching a small mirror. 

Professor McGonagall announces new restrictions, including a 6:00 p.m. curfew. A teacher must escort students 
between classes, and there is a ban on all evening activities, including Quidditch practice. She also says the school 
may close permanently. 

The attacked Ravenclaw girl is a — > Prefect, — > Penelope Clearwater. Percy is in shock, apparently having believed 
Prefects were immune from attacks. Harry and Ron decide it is time to ask Hagrid what he knows about the — > 
Chamber of Secrets. Using Harry's — > Invisibility Cloak, they go to his hut, but before they can ask him anything, 
they are interrupted by a knock at the door. Harry and Ron hide under the Cloak as — > Professor Dumbledore and — > 
Minister of Magic — > Cornelius Fudge enter. Fudge apparently believes, like Harry and Ron, that it was Hagrid who 
opened the Chamber fifty years earlier. Over Dumbledore's protests, Fudge is sending Hagrid to — > Azkaban as a 
precaution. Ron whispers to Harry that Azkaban is the Wizard prison. — > Lucius Malfoy arrives with an Order signed 
by the Governors of Hogwarts calling for Dumbledore's removal as Headmaster, although Fudge objects. As he is 
leaving, Dumbledore says, "I will only truly have left the school when none here are loyal to me. You will also find 
that help will be given at Hogwarts to those who ask for it." As he speaks, he looks directly at Harry and Ron 
huddled under the Cloak. Malfoy and Dumbledore then leave. Hagrid says that if anyone wants to find some 
answers, they should just follow the spiders, and he leaves as well, escorted by Fudge. 



Chapter 14: Cornelius Fudge 61 

Analysis 

The revelation that Hagrid may be involved with the opening of the Chamber is clearly a hard one for Harry to deal 
with. The proof seems incontrovertible, Harry has actually seen the events of the day Hagrid was discovered. Harry's 
trust in Hagrid has been shaken, but still remains in place for the moment; it is only after the attacks start again that 
Harry feels he has to approach Hagrid to find out about the events that resulted in his expulsion. 

In the meanwhile, the diary has been stolen; Harry seems to believe that it was a targeted theft, as nothing else of his 
has been taken. Harry and Ron have also concluded that it was someone in Gryffindor. Both of these facts could turn 
out to be significant. One thing that is certain at this point is that Harry will not be able to learn anything more about 
the night Hagrid was expelled from Hogwarts by this route. 

If Harry had braced Hagrid about those events, almost certainly he would also have had to explain how he had seen 
them, and the early revelation of the role of the diary would have significantly weakened the story. Thus, Hagrid's 
arrest at this point, or some other way of rendering Hagrid unavailable for the remainder of the year, is necessary to 
the story line. Having Hagrid arrested at this point also introduces us to Azkaban Prison and the fear wizards have of 
the place. From the title of the next book, — > Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, we can figure that Azkaban 
will figure largely in it; and as it has been at least mentioned now in both this and the previous book, we can guess 
that Azkaban will reappear a number of times in future books as well. 

From what we have seen of him already, we can gather that Lucius Malfoy is seldom, if ever, straightforward in his 
motives. In this case, he tells us that the Board of Hogwarts has seen fit to suspend Dumbledore for not preventing 
the attacks on the students. Readers are, by this time, well aware that his motives are seldom what they seem, and his 
machinations are extensive. It is a safe assumption that he has coerced the board into suspending Dumbledore; his 
evident air of satisfaction when delivering the document speaks to that. However, we are left wondering exactly what 
he hopes to gain by this action. Is his hatred of Dumbledore sufficient for this level of action against him? Or is there 
something more that we have not yet discovered? 

Hagrid is careful to tell Harry and Ron about the spiders; we don't yet know why. We have seen the spiders acting 
oddly already, near Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. Before he leaves, Dumbledore seems to look directly at Harry and Ron, though they are under the Invisibility 
Cloak. Can Dumbledore really see them? 

Greater Picture 

It should be noted that a new attack occurs immediately after the theft of the diary. It is certain that the diary was 
deliberately disposed of; carrying something into a disused bathroom and flushing it down the toilet is not something 
that would happen accidentally. Almost immediately after the diary is stolen from Harry, there is another attack. If in 
fact the diary is somehow connected to the attacks, which seems likely, then equally it seems likely that the original 
owner has stolen it back for some reason. Additionally, we are told that the thief is almost certainly a Gryffindor 
student. We will find out that the diary is, in fact, associated with the attacks and with a Gryffindor student in the 
final chapters of this book. 

We are led to believe, by what the Twins say, that Percy is distressed only because a Prefect has been attacked. Percy 
had quite plainly believed that Prefects would be invulnerable. Even so, his reaction appears to be extreme, until we 
learn in the end of this book that Ginny had caught him kissing Penelope Clearwater. Revelation of this romantic 
entanglement makes Percy's shock understandable at last. 



Chapter 14: Cornelius Fudge 62 

The fact that Hermione runs to the library after Harry hears "the voice" again is perhaps the thing that will help 
Harry the most in his task of saving the day again: she is able to connect the fact that Harry is the only one that can 
hear a voice inside the walls with some details her own intelligence provides. She comes to the conclusion at this 
point that the monster is a — > Basilisk, which Harry can hear because of his — > Parseltongue ability, which allows 
him to speak to snakes. A Basilisk kills with its gaze if someone looks directly into his eyes. However, no one in this 
book has yet died, because they have seen the monster in an indirect fashion: Mrs. Norris reflected in the puddle of 
water outside — > Myrtle's bathroom, — > Colin through his camera, — > Justin through — > Nearly-Headless Nick (who 
sees it directly, but since he is already dead, it can't kill him again), and Hermione and Penelope reflected in a mirror 
Hermione was carrying. Hermione also guesses why the voice that Harry hears seems to pass easily through floors, 
and does not appear to have a source: the Basilisk uses the pipes to go through the walls of the school unmolested. 

Lucius' motives in getting Dumbledore suspended are never entirely cleared up, but some clarification comes from 
the understanding that Lucius engineered the attacks, even though he apparently remains not entirely certain of the 
mechanism involved. Knowing that Lucius provided the weapon, we can see that his arranging for Dumbledore's 
suspension is an attempt to give the weapon free reign. Of all of the teachers at Hogwarts, only three seem to be 
willing to accept the idea that there might be a Chamber of Secrets that could contain a monster: Dumbledore, who 
had been at Hogwarts at the time, McGonagall, who accepts Dumbledore's word on it implicitly, and — > Lockhart, 
who is utterly ineffectual. By removing Dumbledore, Lucius is effectively halving the strength of the forces 
countering the monster. 



Chapter 15: Aragog 



Synopsis 

Security is tighter than ever. — > Harry and — > Ron are unable to visit — > Hermione in the infirmary. Teachers 
shepherd students around in little groups. Most students are upset and frightened, although — > Malfoy is seemingly 
pleased over having played some role in — > Dumbledore's removal. 

About a fortnight later in Herbology, — > Ernie Macmillan, the Hufflepuff who had earlier accused Harry of being the 
Heir of Slytherin, apologizes and asks Harry if he believes Malfoy could be the Heir. Harry points out some spiders 
to Ron, the first they have seen since — > Hagrid's arrest, and comments that they appear to be headed for the — > 
Forbidden Forest. Ron is not cheerful over this news. As they are escorted to their next class, Defence Against the 
Dark Arts, Harry says that in order to follow the spiders, they will need his — > Invisibility Cloak, and they should 
take Fang. — > Professor Lockhart bounds into the classroom, gaily saying that with Hagrid arrested, the danger has 
passed. Ron wants to dispute that, but Harry reminds him that they were not actually there. Harry decides they 
should follow the spiders that night. 

Waiting until past midnight for the Common room to clear, Harry and Ron make their way through the halls, 
crowded with teachers and ghosts looking for signs of the Monster. They get Fang from Hagrid's hut and, making 
their way into the Forest, follow the spiders by wand light. Hearing something large moving, they investigate. It is — > 
Mr. Weasley's flying car, wandering the Forest. As they look to see how it is doing, they are caught by giant spiders 
and dragged to a hollow among the trees. There they meet — > Aragog, the patriarch of a huge giant spider colony. 
Aragog, cranky at having his sleep disturbed, tells his children to kill Harry and Ron. Harry forestalls this by saying 
they are Hagrid's friends, and he is in trouble, arrested again for apparently opening the Chamber. Aragog admits he 
was believed to be the Monster, but he was not. The Monster is another creature, one that is an enemy to spiders, and 
such that he cannot even name it. Aragog was blamed for killing a girl, but he says the girl died in a bathroom, a part 
of the Castle he was never in. Hagrid kept him in a cupboard in the dungeon. As Aragog is unable to help them 
further, Harry says they will just go. Aragog says no, his children will not harm Hagrid on his command, but he does 
not have enough control over them to keep Hagrid's friends safe. As the spiders start their attack, Mr. Weasley's car 



Chapter 15: Aragog 63 

screeches onto the scene. Harry and Ron bundle themselves and Fang into it, and it carries them back to Hagrid's hut, 
leaves them, and returns to the Forest. 

Back in the Gryffindor dorm, Harry has a sudden thought: was the girl killed in the bathroom — > Moaning Myrtle? 

Analysis 

Hermione's being Petrified, as alarming as it is, is not without some good effects. Until now, Harry had been 
suspected of being the Heir of Slytherin, because of his being able to — > talk to snakes. Now, though, even the most 
suspicious of Harry's fellow students agree that Harry cannot be the instigator of the attacks, as he would not have 
injured Hermione. Ernie, in particular, announces his belief that it is not Harry but Malfoy who is the Heir; Ron's 
evident amusement at the idea is probably due to Harry and Ron having come up with the same idea several months 
previously. 

We see here the truth to Hagrid's utterance that if people wanted to learn some stuff, they should follow the spiders. 
Whenever we have seen the spiders in the past, Harry has thought that it looked like they were trying to run away 
from something. It now seems that they were trying to run towards something. We find that they are apparently 
headed for a spider colony in the Forbidden Forest led by Aragog, perhaps feeling that the — > Acromantula colony 
will afford them some protection. It is from Aragog that Harry and Ron learn at least some of the truth about events 
at Hagrid's expulsion from Hogwarts. And Aragog also gives Harry a clue to where the entrance to the Chamber is. 

It is, for a while, uncertain as to whether Harry will be able to use this knowledge, as they seem to be surrounded by 
masses of inimical and hungry spiders. The flying car being present and willing to help them seems fortuitous, but is 
an indication of the author's deftness at preparing situations to pay off in future chapters (and future books). We were 
led to believe that, having delivered Harry and Ron to Hogwarts and gone off to sulk in the Forest, the role of the 
flying car was done; we are pleased to see that in fact there is still something that the aging and ailing car can do for 
Harry. While it certainly seems odd, at first glance, to assign personality to a machine, we see that the car in this 
chapter does show personality, and that personality is consistent from the arrival at Hogwarts through this chapter. 

Questions 
Further Study 

1. The monster, now, has petrified Mrs. Norris, — > Colin Creevey, — > Justin Finch-Fletchley, Hermione, and — > 
Penelope Clearwater. Is it targeting those who are not pure-blooded? Or is this random? 

2. The flying car has come to Harry's rescue; will it do so again, in a later book? 

Greater Picture 

There is very little in this chapter that will carry forward to later books. We will learn that Harry's guess, that the girl 
who died is Moaning Myrtle, is correct, and we will learn how she died. We see further illumination of Lockhart's 
character in this chapter. We learn of the existence of Aragog. However, rather than laying groundwork for future 
books, this chapter is almost entirely involved with the business of moving this book's story forward to its close. 

Aragog's fate is revisited in — > Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, when he dies from old age and brings 
Hagrid, — > Professor Slughorn, and Harry together to mourn his death. Hagrid at that point will be surprised to find 
that Aragog's offspring do not grant him free passage, but rather actually try to attack him. Given their experiences in 
this chapter, neither Harry nor Ron is at all surprised by their behaviour. 

Aragog's children will appear again in the closing chapters of the last book, — > Harry Potter and the Deathly 
Hallows, and Hagrid will again assume that they are less dangerous than they are. 

We will not see the flying car again, and while Moaning Myrtle will appear in future books, the circumstances of her 
death will not prove important after this book. 



Chapter 16: The Chamber of Secrets 64 

Chapter 16: The Chamber of Secrets 

Synopsis 

With increased security, getting into — > Moaning Myrtle's bathroom will be difficult, but — > Harry and — > Ron will 
need to talk to Myrtle to find out if their guess is correct. 

— > Professor McGonagall reminds them that exams will be starting in only a week's time. Apparently this catches 
everyone by surprise. With the school in the state it is in, it seemed unlikely that exams would continue. 

Three days later, Professor McGonagall announces at breakfast that the — > Mandrakes are ready, and the Petrified 
victims will be revived that night. — > Ginny sits down beside Harry and Ron. It seems she has something important 
to say to them, but when — > Percy arrives after a night's patrolling, she runs away. Percy says he knows what she was 
going to talk to them about, and that it had nothing to do with the Chamber; but he deflects questions about what it 
was. 

While it is possible that the mystery will be solved with — > Hermione's revival, Harry still wants to see if Moaning 
Myrtle can help them. An opportunity appears that morning: as — > Professor Lockhart escorts students to — > History 
of Magic class, Harry and Ron suggest that he doesn't really need to guard them with Hagrid arrested and the threat 
gone, and he agrees and goes off to take a nap. Harry and Ron manage to leave the group and head for Myrtle's 
bathroom, but are found by Professor McGonagall, who demands to know what they are doing. Harry says they want 
to visit Hermione in the hospital wing. Touched by their concern, McGonagall allows them to go, and now they are 
forced to actually go to the infirmary. While visiting Hermione, they find paper caught in her hand. Removing it with 
some difficulty, they see it is a page from a book describing — > Basilisks. "Pipes" is handwritten in the margin. Harry 
realizes that a Basilisk kills with its gaze, but because no one was looking directly at it, nobody died. Mrs. Norris 
saw a reflection in the water on the floor. — > Colin Creevey was looking through his camera lens. — > Justin saw it 
through — > Nearly Headless Nick, and, of course, Hermione had her mirror. This explains both the spiders fleeing it 
and the — > roosters being killed — a rooster's crow is fatal to it. Harry can hear the voice because he is a — > 
Parselmouth — the Basilisk is a snake. It travels through the walls and ceilings using the plumbing. It occurs to Ron 
that, if Myrtle was the Basilisk's victim last time, the Chamber's entrance may be in Moaning Myrtle's washroom. 

Harry and Ron go to the staff room to report their findings to Professor McGonagall; nobody is there, so they decide 
to wait. There is an announcement ordering all students to their Houses. Harry and Ron hide so they can find out 
what has happened. Professor McGonagall and the staff arrive, and McGonagall says a student has been taken into 
the Chamber. It is Ginny Weasley. Lockhart arrives, belatedly, and is told what has happened. Several teachers call 
him on his boasts over the past few weeks and he is appointed to open the Chamber and defeat the Monster. He 
excuses himself to go to his office and "prepare". Having gotten rid of him, the remaining instructors plan how they 
will inform the students and the future of the school. 

Harry and Ron rush to Lockhart's office to tell him what they know. There they find him hastily packing his 
belongings. He admits that he never actually did the feats in his books. Rather, he took credit for other wizards 
accomplishments and used a charm to erase their memories. He threatens Harry and Ron with a memory charm, but 
Harry — > disarms him, and Ron throws his wand out the window. They force Lockhart to go with them to Moaning 
Myrtle's washroom. Myrtle says that when she was a student, she went into the washroom to have a bit of a cry. 
Hearing a boy's voice, she looked out of the cubicle and saw big yellow eyes — then she died. She points out one 
particular basin. Harry addresses it in — > Parseltongue, and it opens to reveal a vertical shaft. Ron and Harry push 
Lockhart down the shaft first, then follow. 

Finding themselves in a tunnel, they investigate. A giant snake skin is lying on the ground. Lockhart pretends to 
faint, but as Ron approaches him, he grabs Ron's wand. He says he will tell everyone that he defeated the monster, 
and use a piece of the snake skin as proof, but that Harry and Ron were unfortunately rendered insane after seeing 
Ginny's dead body. He casts a memory charm, but Ron's broken wand backfires and explodes, causing Lockhart to 



Chapter 16: The Chamber of Secrets 65 

erase his own memory and the ceiling to collapse. Harry and Ron are unhurt, but the fallen rubble separates them. 
Harry leaves Ron to clear the rock fall while he explores the tunnel further ahead. He finds a door, which also opens 
when he speaks Parseltongue. 

Analysis 

It is here that the truth about Lockhart's abilities is revealed: all the things he said he did in his books were actually 
done by other people, and having learned their stories, he — > alters their memory so that he can claim the credit for 
the others' doings, without fear of their contradicting his claims. As we have seen, he is magically quite weak, with 
the apparent exception of his Memory charms, and here is defeated by Harry's disarmament charm, as he was by — > 
Professor Snape in the Dueling Club. We can suppose that he is somewhat transparent to other wizards as well; he is 
certainly not held in particular esteem by any of the instructors at Hogwarts, so it is entirely possible that he is given 
misinformation by those whose stories he is stealing. This would, in fact, explain his confidence in the ineffectual — > 
Pixie-banishing charm he had used in the first — > Defence Against the Dark Arts class. Of course, he had never used 
it himself, merely borrowing it from a more accomplished wizard. It is likely that the wizard he borrowed it from, 
out of disgust at Lockhart's general pandering to the audience, gave him an ineffectual charm in hopes that it would 
bring Lockhart down a few notches when he did try to use it. 

It is worthwhile examining the technique used by the Weasley children for de — > gnoming the garden — > earlier in 
the light of this revelation. While we are never explicitly told that the technique was from Lockhart's book, the 
reference to Gilderoy Lockhart's Guide to Household Pests does tend to indicate that as the source. The fact that the 
technique is, ultimately, ineffectual would also tend to suggest Lockhart as the original source. 

This is a particularly telling comment on the nature of celebrity and those who seek it. Lockhart, who the author has 
said was modeled on a real person , is clearly willing to sacrifice anyone and anything in order to keep his own 
star bright. Harry, who — > Hagrid had — > earlier said was more famous than Lockhart would ever be, clearly is not 
interested in the fame he has fallen into; we see throughout this book that he is trying, in some cases futilely, to stay 
out of the limelight. In contrast to Harry, who remains a solid, sympathetic character despite his renown, Lockhart 
has made himself into a glossy, empty shell, and the reader cannot help but be pleased to see him hoist by his own 
petard. 

When they are approaching the Chamber, Ron's broken wand finally does something well: when Lockhart steals it 
and, ignoring the possibility that Ginny may still be alive, attempts to erase Harry and Ron's memories, it backfires 
and Obliviates him, as well as causing a small explosion. This backfire ends Lockhart's plan to claim to have found 
the Chamber and destroyed the Monster, at the cost of three student lives; it also causes a rock fall that separates 
Harry and Ron. Now, Harry will have to search for Ginny alone, without his friends' help. 

Questions 
Greater Picture 

We will later find out that the effects of the memory charm backfire on Lockhart are quite long-lasting, and Lockhart 
is not yet recovered when we meet him some three years later. This is to be expected, in a way; Lockhart had been 
intending the charm he placed on Ron to be permanent, so when it backfired on him, it is only to be expected that it 
act permanently. 

Even as early as this, we start to see some signs of the future romantic entanglements of the main characters in the 
series. Ginny, having something important that she needs to tell people, approaches Harry first, rather than one of her 
own brothers. Of course, earlier in the book, we had seen that Ginny was showing all the signs of the classic 
schoolgirl crush on Harry, but it should be noted that a person with such a crush is almost always too much in awe of 
the subject of the crush to ever approach him. This would be an indication that Ginny's feelings have matured and 



Chapter 16: The Chamber of Secrets 66 

deepened, possibly beyond the crush level. Despite several side roads on both Harry's and Ginny's part, this 
relationship will persist, off and on, throughout the entire series. 

We also see the first of several progressively-larger hints that the author drops about the relationship between Ron 
and Hermione. While Ron is upset at the depredations of the Monster, we can see that he is much more upset at 
Hermione's Petrification than at the fate of anyone else, except Ginny, his sister. True to his character, though, Ron 
will not recognize his concern for what it is for several years yet. 

The fact that Harry is unable to tell whether he is speaking English or Parseltongue should be unsurprising, as he 
cannot tell the difference between the two languages when hearing them. It is in this chapter that this is pointed up; 
nobody else can hear the Basilisk, because to them its speech is a low, undifferentiated hissing, but to Harry it 
sounds like plain speech. This will prove a plot point in the final book of the series. 

References 

[1] http://www.jkrowling.com/textonly/en/extrastuff_view.cfm?id=9 

Chapter 17: The Heir of Slytherin 

Synopsis 

— > Harry finds himself at one end of a long chamber; at the other is a giant statue, probably — > Salazar Slytherin. The 
statue has an ancient, monkey-like face with a long thin beard, and is wearing sweeping robes. Lying on the floor is 
— > Ginny. His efforts to revive Ginny are interrupted by a tall, black-haired boy who identifies himself as — > Tom 
Riddle. Riddle, who is holding Harry's dropped wand, explains he is a memory, preserved in his diary for fifty years. 
He opened the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago, intending to purge — > Muggle-borns and half-bloods from the 
school. However, when the school was to close due to the attacks and because — > Dumbledore (then the 
Transfiguration teacher) was keeping such a close watch on him, he halted the attacks and framed — > Hagrid. Not 
wanting to waste the years spent searching for the Chamber, he left behind a diary containing the memory of his 
sixteen-year-old self in hopes it would, one day, fall into the hands of an unsuspecting victim who would help finish 
his work. 

Ginny had been writing in the diary all year. Riddle wrote back sympathetically, and Ginny confessed her fears, 
hopes, and feelings to him. She essentially poured some of her soul into him, which was exactly what he wanted. He 
gradually grew more powerful and eventually poured some of his soul back into her, possessing her and using her 
body to strangle the school roosters, write on the walls, and open the Chamber of Secrets. He tells Harry how Ginny 
told him Harry's entire history and how happy he was when Harry picked up the diary after Ginny became fearful 
and threw it away. He says he was disappointed when Ginny reclaimed it. Having seen Harry with the diary on 
Valentine's day, she was afraid it would reveal her secrets, and so she ransacked Harry's room to retrieve it. Tom 
forced Ginny into the Chamber for two purposes: first, to sap her remaining life force and come fully to life; and 
second, to lure Harry Potter there so he could meet him directly. 

Tom wants to know how Harry, an ordinary baby wizard, could have defeated — > Lord Voldemort, the most 
powerful wizard of the age. Harry wonders why Tom cares. Riddle reveals he is, in fact, a half-blood. His mother 
named him Tom after his Muggle father and Marvolo after his wizard grandfather, a descendant of Salazar Slytherin. 
He scrambled his name to create a new one — Lord Voldemort, a name he knew people would fear when he became 
the most powerful wizard in the world. It was also a way to eliminate his Muggle father's name. Harry states 
Voldemort was not the most powerful wizard, — > Albus Dumbledore is. He says Dumbledore probably saw right 
through Tom when he was at school and is still stronger than Voldemort. When Tom says Dumbledore was driven 
from the school by Tom's memory, Harry retorts that Dumbledore may be closer than Tom realizes. 



Chapter 17: The Heir of Slytherin 67 

— > Fawkes, Dumbledore's Phoenix, suddenly appears in a burst of fire and drops the — > Sorting Hat at Harry's feet. It 
then perches on his shoulder. Tom is openly contemptuous: a songbird and an old hat. This is what Dumbledore 
sends to his allies? Tom again demands to know how Harry defeated Voldemort. Harry notices that Riddle's form is 
becoming more solid while Ginny's life force fades. Harry must act quickly if he is to defeat Riddle. Harry tells 
Riddle that by sacrificing her life for her son, his mother saved him from Voldemort and reduced him to an 
ineffectual remnant. 

Mastering his rage, Tom agrees that indeed would be a powerful protection. He then summons the Monster — it is the 
— > Basilisk. Harry avoids its deadly gaze, as Fawkes leaves his shoulder. Harry is smashed against the wall by the 
snake's coil but is not bitten. He sees that Fawkes has blinded the Basilisk. Tom is still ordering the serpent to kill 
Harry, telling it to smell him. The thrashing snake has swept the Sorting Hat into Harry's arms. He puts it on, 
thinking "Help me!" The Hat constricts sharply and something hits him in the head. Taking it off, Harry finds a 
sword inside. As the Basilisk strikes, Harry impales it through the roof of its mouth and into its brain, killing it. But a 
single venomous fang pierces his arm. 

Harry removes the fang, but it is too late. As the venom spreads, Harry dimly sees Fawkes land beside him. Riddle 
tells Harry he will soon be dead, even Dumbledore's bird knows; he is weeping. But both have forgotten that Phoenix 
tears heal wounds. Tom suddenly realizes this and attempts a killing curse. Before he can strike, Fawkes drops the 
diary into Harry's lap, and Harry stabs the diary with the fang. Tom Riddle is destroyed. 

As Riddle vanishes, Ginny awakens. She gives a great gasp, begins crying, and says she wanted to tell Harry at 
breakfast that it was her that who was helping Riddle, that the diary was controlling her, but she could not speak in 
front of — > Percy. Now she is afraid of being expelled. Harry comforts her and takes her to where — > Ron has been 
clearing rocks. Ron wants to know where the sword and the bird came from, but Harry wants to explain later when 
Ginny is not around. Harry asks where — > Lockhart is. Ron points to the end of the tunnel. Lockhart has forgotten 
everything, even his own name. 

Fawkes hovers near Harry, and Harry remembers that Phoenixes can lift amazingly heavy loads. Everyone holds on 
to each other and, with Harry holding Fawkes' tail, are flown from the Chamber to — > Moaning Myrtle's washroom. 
Myrtle seems mildly upset that Harry is still alive. She was going to offer him space in her toilet if he died. Fawkes 
flies to — > Professor McGonagall's office. Harry knocks on the door and opens it. 

Analysis 

This chapter is largely concerned with first, providing the hidden story behind the events that have occurred, and 
second, the action involved in defeating the adversary (here, Voldemort, as in the first book) and the Monster, and 
saving Ginny. As such, in the context of the book, there is not much analysis that can be done. The first part of the 
chapter is largely exposition, with Riddle explaining the back story; then, there is the brief battle with the Basilisk, 
and the return to the end of the tunnel where Ron waits. This leaves very little to analyze. However, it is perhaps 
useful to note that "a memory of Tom Riddle" can act independently and can take over another person's life force to 
return itself to life. This may prove unusual enough a characteristic to warrant special attention. 



Chapter 17: The Heir of Slytherin 68 

Questions 
Review 

1. How does Harry see the Basilisk without dying? 

Further Study 

1. Fawkes must see the the Basilisk's eyes, in order to puncture them. How does he do so without dying? 

2. How does Tom Riddle manage to see the Basilisk? He, too, will be vulnerable to its eyes. Or can the Basilisk 
switch that function on and off at will? 

Greater Picture 

Riddle repeatedly says that the diary contains a memory of Tom. What Harry is seeing and talking to is only a 
memory. However, in — > Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Professor Dumbledore points out that Riddle's 
diary does far more than a memory should be able to - it can think and respond on its own, it can take over another 
person and make them do its bidding, and it can sap the life force from another person to create a body for itself. 
This strongly indicates that the diary is actually a — > Horcrux. Or rather, was a Horcrux; Harry has destroyed it. 

In — > Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, it will be revealed that Harry has lucked into one of the very few 
techniques that will destroy a Horcrux: Basilisk venom. In that book, it is revealed that a Horcrux will act to keep its 
physical container intact, to the full extent of ordinary magic; in order to destroy a Horcrux, its physical container 
must be damaged beyond the ability of ordinary magic. Also in that chapter, it will be revealed that the only known 
cure for Basilisk venom is Phoenix tears, which, due to the extreme rarity of Phoenixes, are certainly outside the 
realm of ordinary magic. 

This of course leads to an apparent problem: there is actually a phoenix in close proximity shortly before Harry stabs 
the diary. Could not the diary, making use of more ordinary magic similar to the — > Accio charm, summon some of 
Fawkes' tears to itself? Possibly it could, but the author has stated, in an interview given after the publication of 
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, that she had very carefully distanced the phoenix before the death blow. And 
looking at the sequence of events, we see that Riddle had, in fact, attempted to Curse Fawkes, driving him away and 
presumably out of range, before Harry stabbed the diary. 

There are a few other useful items that are mentioned in passing in this chapter. Thinking Harry will shortly be dead, 
Riddle mentions his grandfather's name, Marvolo, something that we will learn much later Voldemort had been 
taking some pains to conceal. This will not be useful to Harry, though Dumbledore, who also knows it, uses it to 
unearth one of the Horcruxes: given the approximate age, and the name Marvolo which evidently is not common in 
the Wizarding world, plus the name Riddle associated with a Wizard-caused death in Tom's youth, Dumbledore is 
able to locate Tom's mother's home and retrieve a Horcrux hidden there. Tom also mentions what has likely become 
his greatest shame in the intervening fifty years: that despite being the last heir of Slytherin, Tom is descended from 
a Muggle, and so is one of the very half-bloods that he despises. Harry is able to cause some dissension in the ranks 
of a group of Death Eaters that he is facing in — > Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, before the — > Battle in 
the Ministry, by mentioning that to them. 